 DEVELOPING IN PAIRS **
 Randy and I work on a software tool together. Over the years that we have
 developed it, we have found that we spend a lot of time at each other’s desks.
 We often write code, debug, and test together. It is not uncommon for one of
 us to be typing, while the other one tells what to type. And often, the one not
 typing will point out typos or logic errors. That can be annoying, but it certainly reduces the cycles of compiling and debugging. 
Nobody told us to work this way. We just found that it works well. 
...a development organization is in place, and people have started to
 commit to work and are about to start building the work artifacts.
 Some of the work may be allocated on the basis of CODE OWNERSHIP
 (5.2.13). There is enough understanding about overall requirements to
 start work, though many requirements may have loose ends. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Some people don’t want to work alone, and working alone has
 great risks of blindsiding and misfits. And you need to provide for
 people who don’t want to work alone, and in general engage people
 who are working alone but probably shouldn’t be. 
People sometime feel they can solve a problem only if they have
 help. Some problems are bigger than an individual, so even people
 who are comfortable working alone should work closely with
 someone else who at least provides another set of eyes to look over the
 work. 
It takes extra resources to do this in real time; one might argue that
 code walkthroughs and inspections and reviews are enough to compensate for these problems. But these reviews are usually analytical
 rather than opportunistic. And reviews set up an adversarial context
 where the critics don’t have the same stake as the programmers. And
 reviews catch problems after the programmer has committed to the
 corresponding structures and algorithms and expended a lot of effort
 in elaborating them, rather than stopping them at the conceptual
 stage. And many of these decisions are too detailed to arise in design
 reviews or simply can’t be foreseen until the programmer grapples
 with implementation, yet are weighty enough that they might threaten
 the viability and long-term health of the code. 
Only a limited number of people can sit in front of a keyboard and
 screen. Communication and coordination effort increase nonlinearly
 with number of people. So you can’t always create a team that works
 together as a unit to contribute to an artifact in front of a single screen. 
Therefore: 
Pair compatible designers to work together; together, they can
 produce more than the sum of the two individually. 
There are two keys to making this successful. First, the individuals
 must be able to work well together. This means that pair assignments
 must not be made arbitrarily. In fact, because a pair is in reality a small
 team, SELF SELECTING TEAM (4.2.11) must be applied. The chief consideration for creating a pair is that the two want to work together. 
Second, the style of pair development must not be dictated; it
 should be left up to the individuals. Simply put, there should not be a
 rule that no line of code is written unless both people are at the keyboard. Instead, give the pair the assignment, and let them figure out
 how to do the development. Note that this practice supports FEATURE
 ASSIGNMENT (5.2.14). 
The pair needn’t always comprise developers only. In BUILD PROTO
TYPES (4.1.7), and in many other activities, one of the pair can be a customer, systems engineer, or technologist representing an area of risk
 being explored by the prototype. At Mediagenix, a tester sometimes
 pairs with a developer as the tester drives with tests, and the developer fixes bugs. This makes it possible to circumvent the project’s
 formal bug reporting bureaucracy, reducing the time to a stable load
 (see also COUPLING DECREASES LATENCY (5.1.22)). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Overall, this leads to a more effective implementation process.
 Experience has shown that, contrary to simplistic reasoning, it may
 cost less overall to program in pairs than to have one coder work on
 code at a time. In an analogous study, it was just found that it actually
 saves money in a hospital to have a pharmacist follow doctors on their
 rounds as they make prescriptions. The pharmacist’s insights in correcting the doctor’s errors (e.g., prescribing drugs that are incompatible with each other) saved more money (in additional health costs)
 than the pharmacist cost; plus, it capitalized on the pharmacist’s dead
 time between activities. 
A pair of people is less likely to be blindsided than an individual
 developer. 
You help ensure that SOMEONE ALWAYS MAKES PROGRESS (4.1.20). 
If enough people use DEVELOPING IN PAIRS, and if the pairs rotate
 occasionally, you get an emergent structure and emergent organizational behavior that contributes to cross-training, information sharing,
 and trust. 
Compare this pattern with GROUP VALIDATION (4.2.32) and RESPONSIBILITIES ENGAGE (5.1.14). One special case of DEVELOPING IN PAIRS occurs
 when one developer asks another developer (or other suitable expert)
 do a desk check of recently written code. This is much less costly and
 not less effective than the traditional code inspections, code walkthroughs, and code reviews. Though probably less effective than the
 “canonical” form of DEVELOPING IN PAIRS, its worth has empirically been
 validated [Votta1993]. 
There are other configurations which have much of the dynamics of
 DEVELOPING IN PAIRS but which are not strictly just a dynamic duo. At
 Mediagenix we found teams that “programmed with the projector”
 where the computer screen was projected onto a wall, and a team
 jointly commented and guided the work as one person sat at the keyboard. In Bell Laboratories, Joe Davison, Ricky Spiece and Martin
 Biernat worked on a team with one at the white board, one at the terminal “thinking out loud” and representing the customer. In this case,
 the code was written on the board, transcribed into the computer (in
 Smalltalk) and the third person did a real-time code review. 
And in what might be viewed as another slant on pair programming, Doug Lea used a variant of the clean room methodology that
 employed a single programmer: once in a role as programmer, and
 once in a role as tester. Clean room techniques separate these two roles
 to make sure one’s knowledge doesn’t unduly influence the assumptions of the other. In the extreme application of clean room, developers
 are not allowed to use the compiler to check their own code, but await
 such feedback from the tester. Doug mimicked this behavior by
 wearing two hats. In one sense, this is as unlike popular pair programming as one can get: each “side” of Doug worked in isolation. But the
 interplay between the two perspectives was where the power lies:
 bringing multiple perspectives to bear on the same artifact with tight
 coupling of minds. Doug’s mind provided the tight coupling.