 DIVERSE GROUPS *
 ... a development team is coming together, and Birds of a Feather
 tend to Flock Together. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Homogeneous teams that comprise too many of the same kind of
 people easily fall into groupthink-like dysfunction. 
Design is the act of making change to the world. In software, it usually means changing the literature of an author who came before and
 encoded a solution in a programming language. That author usually
 remains as part of the community that retains an interest in the code
 see CODE OWNERSHIP (5.2.13), and the combination of CONWAY’S LAW
 (5.1.7) and ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS MARKET (5.1.9) which implies that
 architecture follows market. 
Change is a process that has several phases, starting with complacency, which is upset by an opportunity or realization of an oversight.
 There is a struggle to identify solutions, the process of realizing the
 solution, culminating in deployment. 
Different people are more comfortable with some parts of this process than with others. Some people are good at identifying problems,
 others with the innovative processes of identifying solutions. Yet
 others are good at focusing on implementation. The variance in comfort comes from variance in experience and individual background
 and temperament. This is true even when programmers in their role as
 designers, making a change, are the same programmers who were the
 original authors of the code. 
Therefore: 
Consider temperaments and diverse experience backgrounds
 when assembling a team. This diversity sometimes lines up with
 social classifications like age and gender, but more generally can be
 assessed on a personal level. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
One source of variation is the variety of domains in the application
 itself; see DOMAIN EXPERTISE IN ROLES (4.2.22). There is an open question
 whether a SELF SELECTING TEAM (4.2.11) prejudices a homogeneous
 group outcome; in any case, DIVERSE GROUPS (4.2.16) can be a good
 audit of a SELF SELECTING TEAM (4.2.11). 
Another source of variation is the variation in roles. In a vestigial
 pattern DIVERSITY OF MEMBERSHIP, the pattern recommends building a
 requirements teams from diverse roles: 
The team should include a developer, a user or user’s repre
sentative, and a system tester (at least one of each). These 
individuals will work through the issues surrounding product requirements, often using small prototypes to identify the 
requirements and determine testing criteria. The user of prototypes can be closely tied to using use cases or similar usage 
scenarios as analysis and validation tools. 
One area in which this approach is especially useful is in the 
specification and design of the user interface. The developer 
creates mock-ups of the user interface, and the user and system tester examine them. In this way, this small subteam can 
go through many different designs of the user interface and 
select the best one. 
See more about this kind of diversity in HOLISTIC DIVERSITY (4.2.19). 
Sometimes teams form around mutual interest and talent in a
 domain, as in SUBSYSTEM BY SKILL (4.2.23), and diversity falls along other
 dimensions of interest. 
Yet another kind of diversity is ethnic diversity. The oft-touted
 value of ethnic diversity is that it brings together people who can think
 about problems differently, from much different perspectives, which
 improves the chance of finding a good solution. But there are other
 subtle advantages. In a large multinational corporation, we found that
 each department had a few members of French national origin. The
 French all ate lunch together, which provided a natural path of communication flow between departments. 
One kind of person you want in the mix is a PUBLIC CHARACTER
 (4.2.17). 
However, one must guard against stereotyping people; e.g., using
 personality instruments or other information to limit the roles of
 people in organizations. See [KerthCoplienWeinberg1998]. 
See the related pattern BALANCED TEAM (10.5.5) in [Bramble2002].