ENGAGE CUSTOMERS **
 Clerk measuring customer for a suit of clothes, San Antonio, Texas. 
A friend of one of the authors once designed and implemented the user
 interface for a large system. He got input from customers on how to make it
 useful for them. Unfortunately, the requirements writers had a different idea,
 and made him remove the features the customers liked. But then the customers asked for the missing features, and the requirements writers were
 forced to relent. I guess it didn’t help relations between my friend and the
 requirements writers. 
...an organization is in place, and its Quality Assurance function has
 been generally shaped and chartered. The Quality Assurance (QA)
 function needs input to drive its work. Many people in the enterprise
 are concerned about quality. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
It’s important that the development organization ensures and
 maintains customer satisfaction by encouraging communication
 between customers and key development organization roles. This
 isn’t the responsibility of any single “customer satisfaction” organ, but
 the need pervades the entire organization structure. Most organizations are averse to direct contact between developers and customers,
 fearing that the developers are “loose cannons on deck” who will
 promise to deliver things that go beyond the scope of a job. 
Yet you can’t know all the requirements up front, so developers
 need to keep going back to customers for more information—and customers need to keep coming back to developers with their insights,
 particularly when developers BUILD PROTOTYPES (4.1.7). Requirements
 changes occur even after design reviews are complete and coding has
 started. 
Many organizations depend on their marketing organization to
 provide requirements and needs. But marketing doesn’t provide
 design data (BeyerHoltzblatt1998], p. 30). The best that marketing can
 do (or should do) is to understand what will sell and why people will
 buy what you want to sell. Designers in turn must understand how
 people will use the product in a way that creates value for them. Good
 value sometimes leads to good market potential, but marketing usually looks at other factors (brand name recognition, product name and
 posturing n the market) about which designers care little. 
Missing customer requirements are a serious problem: most problems in software systems can be traced to requirements problems
 ([Daley1977]; [Boehm1976]). Yet it seems like so much effort to elicit
 them — which is work that is not directly producing a marketable artifact. It seems like makework and overhead. 
Customers are traditionally not part of the mainstream development, which makes it difficult to discover and incorporate their
 insights. Yet customer contact correlates with project success
 [KeilCarmel1995]. 
Trust relationship between managers and coders are often strained,
 so you don’t want them to be the sole intermediary between developers and customers. 
Therefore: 
Closely couple the Customer role to the Developer and Architect,
 not just to QA or marketing. In short, developers and architects must
 talk freely and often with customers. When possible, engage customers in their environment rather than brining them into your
 environment. 
 Two things are necessary for this to happen: opportunity and culture. Developers must have the opportunity (and the means) to communicate with customers. They should meet customers personally to
 establish trust and free flow of communication. 
But these visits will be superficial if the organization culture builds
 walls between customers and developers. In particular, if system
 requirements must go through a lengthy formal process to be
 approved, the developer will be hamstrung — unable to respond to
 customer requests. Therefore, the organization must develop a culture
 where developers have some latitude to respond to customers. This is
 not saying, however, that all control of requirements should be relegated to the developer. Order is necessary. 
Beyer and Holtzblatt note that “many common ways of working
 with customers remove them from their work.”
 [BeyerHoltzblatt1998], pp. 36-7. One way to help this is by “putting
 designers and engineers directly in the customer’s work context”
 [BeyerHoltzblatt1998], p. 20. This is particularly important if you are
 using customer engagement to create wholly new market directions
 for the enterprise, rather than refining existing work. Putting developers in the customer work environment also trains developers’ intuition about good design and good human interfaces, and this intuition
 can fill in when specific detailed requirements are unavailable
 [BeyerHoltzblatt1998], p. 35. 
Language is a key element of culture that can smooth customer
 engagement if treated properly, and smother it if treated badly. Don’t
 make your customers learn UML or other technical notations; do your
 best to learn their language and to communicate with them in the
 terms of their culture. 
QA can monitor the relationship to keep the direction within contractual business limits, while allowing a free flow of insights back and
 forth between developers and customers. Such communication can
 often flow unimpeded; however, see the pattern GATE KEEPER (4.2.10). 
Note that this pattern is all about relationships and culture. It is the
 culture of respect for and communication with customers that makes
 the communication effective, for example, during the writing of use
 cases, as described in PARTICIPATING AUDIENCE (10.5.20) ([Bramble2002],
 p. 35). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
 This pattern supports requirements discovery from the customer, as
 required by SCENARIOS DEFINE PROBLEM (4.2.8) and BUILD PROTOTYPES
 (4.1.7). Other patterns like FIRE WALLS (4.2.9) also build on this pattern.
 The pattern RECOMMITMENT MEETING (4.1.12) is a more formal derivative
 of this pattern in a different context. 
A good understanding of customer needs can avoid rework after
 implementation is done. While it is also important to continuously
 engage customers through each development episode of iteration,
 early understanding helps launch the effort in the right direction. A
 Navision project in Copenhagen felt that improvements in customer
 engagement helped save time on their development schedule (from a
 draft pattern “Scandinavian System Development” by Flemming Pedersen, 24 January 2002). 
This was a strong pattern in the Borland Quattro Pro for Windows
 case study. Also, see [Floyd1992] and in particular the works of Reisin
 and Floyd therein. 
Some processes and methods are founded on customer engagement, such as IBM’s Joint Application Development. Other methods
 are conducive to customer engagement, such as Cunningham and
 Beck’s CRC design technique. Other methods, and especially most
 CASE-based methods, are indifferent or harmful to customer engagement. 
Even some of the best customer engagement techniques tend to
 stop once they achieve some level of contractual agreement about
 what is to be delivered. Customer engagement in agile processes goes
 far beyond that. Developers need to assimilate the context in which
 their product will be used: this is called contextual design. Contextual
 design means gathering data on customers’ models of how they do
 their work rather than creating models of how the program will solve
 the problem. Use Cases are about the latter; contextual design is about
 the former. See [BeyerHoltzblatt1998]. 
The pattern is “ENGAGE CUSTOMERS”, in the plural, to support a
 domain view and to avoid being blind-sided by a single customer. 
The project must be careful to temper interactions between Customer and Developer, using FIRE WALLS (4.2.9), GATE KEEPER (4.2.10),
 and the QA organizational presence as in ENGAGE QUALITY ASSURANCE
 (4.2.29). A big part of interacting with the customer is to learn how
 they want to interact with the project as the unfolding software
 uncovers problems in requirements and systems engineering (see
 APPLICATION DESIGN IS BOUNDED BY TEST DESIGN (4.2.30)). 
Note that “maintaining product quality” is not the problem being
 solved here. Product quality is only one component of customer satisfaction. Studies have shown that customers leave one company for
 another when they feel they are being ignored (20% of the time), or
 because the attention they receive was rude or unhelpful (50% of the
 time). For customers having problems that cost over $100 to fix, and
 the company does not fix it, only 9% would buy again. 82% would do
 business with the company again if the problem was quickly resolved
 after they complained. (The source for the former pair is The Forum
 Corporation; for the latter pair, Traveler’s Insurance Company
 [ZuckermanAndHatala1992].) 
Joe Maranzano [Maranzano1992] notes that this pattern probably
 should come earlier in the language. However, it is important that the
 project roles be defined first—particularly those that interact with the
 customer, and those that are driven by customer input (such as Quality
 Assurance). Said in another way, the organization exists to serve the
 customer, so the organization should be in place before the customer is
 fully engaged. 
This pattern works only if customers are directly accessible to the
 development team. If that is impossible for business reasons or
 because of geographic separation, consider SURROGATE CUSTOMER
 (4.2.7).