 GATE KEEPER **
 ... an organization of developers has formed, in a corporate or social
 context scrutinized by peers, funders, customers, and other “outsiders.” 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
A project must develop good interfaces with the many outsiders
 with whom it interacts, or with whom it should interact. 
Most software development professionals — particularly programmers — are more comfortable interacting with their software and
 working with technology than working with people. Yet isolationism
 doesn’t work: information flow is important. On the other hand, communication has a cost: communication overhead goes up non-linearly
 with the number of external collaborators. That wouldn’t be so bad if
 so many interruptions weren’t noise. And an organization should be in
 control of its external interactions rather than letting the external interactions control it; that is a hallmark of organizational maturity. 
Therefore: 
One project member, a PUBLIC CHARACTER (4.2.17) with an engaging
 personality, rises to the role of GATE KEEPER. This person disseminates leading-edge and fringe information from outside the project
 to project members, “translating” it into terms relevant to the
 project. The GATE KEEPER may also “leak” project information to relevant outsiders. 
 ✥ ✥ ✥ 
This role can also manage the development interface to marketing
 and to the corporate control structure. 
This pattern provides balance for the pattern FIRE WALLS (4.2.9), and
 complements the pattern ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6) (to the degree Customers are still viewed as outsiders). 
GATE KEEPER and FIRE WALLS (4.2.9) alone are insufficient to protect
 developers in an organization whose culture allows marketing to
 drive development schedules. This role can be made explicit in large
 projects whose budget and staffing profiles support funding and support for such a role. But the role can also thrive informally in the margins. 
GATE KEEPER is a pattern that facilitates effective flow of useful information; on the other hand, the FIRE WALLS (4.2.9) role restricts flow of
 detracting information. As described in FIRE WALLS, a self-serving
 person who works their way into this role can do much damage. It is
 probably healthier for the organization if this role is filled by someone
 who is not part of the management establishment, because it is more
 likely that peer support will sustain that person in the role, and it is
 more likely that the person will remain responsive to his or her constituencies. But respected managers also make great GATE KEEPERS. 
The GATE KEEPER pattern has empirical value. In the discussion of
 this pattern at PLoP/94, many of the reviewers noted that creating a
 GATE KEEPER role had served their organizations well. 
Engineers are lousy communicators as a lot; it’s important to
 leverage the communication abilities of an effective communicating
 engineer when one is found. 
Alexander notes that while it is important to build subcultures in a
 society (as we are building a subculture here in the framework of a
 company, or of the software industry as a whole), such a subculture
 should not be closed (MOSAIC OF SUBCULTURES, [Alexander1977], ff. 42);
 also, cp. Alexander’s pattern MAIN GATEWAYS ([Alexander1977], ff. 276). 
One might muse that the GATE KEEPER takes an outsider through any
 rites of passage necessary for more intimate access to the development
 team, by analogy to Alexander’s ENTRANCE TRANSITION
 ([Alexander1977], ff. 548). GATE KEEPER can serve the role of “peda
 gogue” as in Alexander’s pattern NETWORK OF LEARNING
 ([Alexander1977], ff. 99). 
Joe Maranzano (personal interview, 1992) notes that the same
 person often must fill both the MANAGER ROLE and GATE KEEPER roles,
 because of the relationships to external people who need the info. 
If the GATE KEEPER (4.2.10) function starts taking on an aura of stability and legitimacy in its own right, it might point to the fact that
 there are key business issues that cut across the existing organizations.
 Look at FUNCTION OWNER AND COMPONENT OWNER, as well as UPSIDE
 DOWN MATRIX MANAGEMENT (5.1.19), as solutions that broaden the GATE
 KEEPER function to organizational scope.