PHASING IT IN **
 ... key project players have been hired or otherwise brought into the
 project and cover the necessary expertise (DOMAIN EXPERTISE IN ROLES
 (4.2.22)) but the project needs more staff. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Growing projects must figure out how to grow long-term staff:
 whom to hire, how many to hire, and when to hire them. Projects
 must ramp up while minimizing the pains of growth. 
You need enough people for critical mass. Yet you cannot just hire
 anyone off the street; staff are not plug compatible and interchangeable. 
The right set of initial people (SIZE THE ORGANIZATION (4.2.2)) sets the
 tone for the project, and it’s important to hire the key people first. You
 need a critical mass of key people early on. Yet too many people too
 early create a burden for the core team. 
Therefore: 
Phase the hiring program. Start by hiring people to meet the basic
 core competencies of the business and gradually bring on new
 people as the project needs to grow. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The organization can staff up to meet development load. This pattern is closely related to APPRENTICESHIP (4.2.4) and to MODERATE TRUCK
 NUMBER (4.2.24). DAY CARE (4.1.23) can be applied to help with the
 training and mentoring load that new employees place on the organization. 
This is a well-known management technique that allows the project
 to establish an identity early on, and to grow graciously. 
Larry Putnam points out that projects that grow very quickly at the
 beginning tend to be late. He advocates growing staff gradually.
 [Putnam1992]. 
In The Mythical Man-Month Brooks states, “V. A. Vyssotsky of Bell
 Telephone Laboratories estimates that a large project can sustain a
 manpower buildup of 30 percent per year. More than that strains and
 even inhibits the evolution of the essential informal structure and its
 communication pathways.” [Brooks1995], page 293. 
What constitutes “core competencies?” Part of this depends on the
 business you are in. If you are in finance, you want people who can
 develop financial software. The better people you can get early on, the
 better off you will be, and it is probably a good return on investment to
 spare no expense on talent at this early stage. Talent isn’t limited to
 domain knowledge, though; you also need individuals who can put
 customers at ease, who can keep a cool head for strategic planning,
 who can “fill in the cracks” by doing the miscellaneous detailed tasks
 that others don’t want to do or forget to do, etc. Many individuals
 have many of these talents; the key is to cover the crucial needs early
 on with as few people as possible, and to grow the organization once
 that organization has gelled (see STABLE ROLES (5.1.5)). You can achieve
 these goals with HOLISTIC DIVERSITY (4.2.19) and DIVERSE GROUPS (4.2.16).