PUBLIC CHARACTER *
 ...an organization structure is emerging, both formally and informally, and frequent contact at the workplace cultivates friendships as
 well as a social context that begs for support of common social graces
 and functioning. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
An organization is a social entity whose smooth functioning
 depends on more than professional relationships. 
Much of what defines “culture” is the widely known but rarely
 spoken myths, tidbits, history, and interpretations of these stories.
 However, most professional organizations are built around the
 exchange of more structured information in blatantly public forums:
 memoranda, meetings, explicit policies, and executive pronouncements. 
Yet the daily small pieces of information, details, and deep insights
 are the glue that hold the organization and its systems together. Furthermore, this information might include insights on shortcuts and
 other expediencies that serve the culture and its value system while
 falling short of the “letter of the law.” The formal organization rarely
 has any organ that legitimizes the exchange of such information, yet
 such information is crucial not only to the smooth operation of the
 enterprise, but to its very survival. 
Such information includes information outside of the primary business goals, but which is nonetheless important to the support of the
 work environment: where to find a good place for lunch, how to find
 the boss when she’s not in the office, who knows how to fix the jam in
 the copy machine. It also includes meta-knowledge, how to find out
 where to find out certain kinds of information: who would know how
 to find answers to questions about the web server machine? who
 would know where to direct questions about personnel issues. 
Therefore: 
One or more people serve in the role as PUBLIC CHARACTER to help
 social processes both behind the scenes and through social events. 
There may be socio-technological role combinations. For example,
 an Architect role might spend time passing information between
 development coordinators who otherwise wouldn’t take the initiative
 to talk with each other [CoplienDevos2000]. We wrote up this pattern
 as “Shmoozing Architect” at OT ’99. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
MATRON ROLE (4.2.18) and GATE KEEPER (4.2.10) are examples of
 PUBLIC CHARACTERS. 
From Jane Jacobs’s The Death and Life of Great American Cities,
 [Jacobs1961]: 
The social structure of sidewalk life hangs partly on what can 
be called self-appointed public characters. A PUBLIC CHARACTER is anyone who is in frequent contact with a wide circle of 
people and who is sufficiently interested to make himself a PUBLIC CHARACTER. ... His main qualification is that he is public, that he talks to lots of different people. In this way, news 
travels that is of sidewalk interest. 
Jacobs goes on to say that, once the neighborhood recognizes a
 PUBLIC CHARACTER, people consciously tell him gossip (meeting dates,
 lost items) that they want propagated. A PUBLIC CHARACTER is a sort of
 living bulletin-board, with highly advanced search capabilities. 
One finds a similar function in the Maven role in The Tipping Point
 [Gladwell2000]. 
In our experience, large software projects usually have at least one
 PUBLIC CHARACTER, and s/he is critical to project success. When you
 want to know who understands the persistence layer, you don’t ask
 the architect; he’s too busy. You ask the PUBLIC CHARACTER, who won’t
 know beans about persistence, but will know that Mary knows a lot
 about databases, and that she will either understand the persistence
 layer or know who does. 
One interesting form of PUBLIC CHARACTER is the Jester or WISE FOOL
 (4.2.21). In medieval courts, the Jester was a person who could make
 fun of the king with impunity. The king was not obliged to follow the
 jester’s insights; rather, these insights provided stimulus for thought.
 A jester PUBLIC CHARACTER can incite the organization to introspection
 and care; again, part of their qualification is that they are public. Such
 a person might be instrumental in facilitating workshops using creative techniques, visual meeting, system envisioning, and games—as
 well as reporting on user fears and expectations and being a change
 agent. This is also reminiscent of the “laughing uncle” configuration
 Bateson talks about in his writings of Pacific cultures [Bateson1958].
 This uncle advised a child’s father of feelings that the child might not
 convey to the father directly. 
Project members are often penalized for being PUBLIC CHARACTERS —
 “Oh, Mary never gets anything done, she’s always gossiping.” PUBLIC
 CHARACTERS are a vital part of keeping large projects connected and
 successful. In a number of cases, we have seen that the disappearance
 of a single public character caused a major turn in morale and culture
 in the organization, to a much greater degree than the loss of a key technical
 person might do. The role is essentially informal; a project manager can’t
 successfully assign somebody to this role. Rather, the role is something
 that is recognized and taken advantage of when already present. The
 recognition can help sustain the role. 
If you see a team member “always gossiping”, consider whether the
 team member has become a PUBLIC CHARACTER. Ask him or her a couple
 of team-related questions (“Where can I find out more about the garbage collection? Who understands the compiler tools”?) If he or she
 can handle these, as well as other questions (“Where’s the best place to
 have lunch?” “How can I find Phil if he isn’t at his desk?” “And what
 about... Naomi?”), you’ve found your PUBLIC CHARACTER. 
It is instructive to compare the PUBLIC CHARACTER, MATRON ROLE
 (4.2.18), and GATE KEEPER (4.2.10); the PUBLIC CHARACTER is related to,
 but different from, both. The MATRON ROLE is concerned with the nur
turing of the organization, and is inward-focused. On the other hand,
 the GATE KEEPER is outward focused; always looking forward for the
 next great direction. The PUBLIC CHARACTER is somewhat in the middle
 of these two, but separate from each. An ideal project has each of these
 roles, filled by different people. 
A good place for the PUBLIC CHARACTER to hang out is at THE WATER
 COOLER (5.1.20).