 SKUNK WORKS *
 At the end of college, I was interviewed for a job with Lockheed Aircraft
 Corporation, including their famed “Skunk Works” division. They had a huge
 skunk painted on the wall at the entrance to their work area. Everyone said
 the same thing to me: “We can’t tell you what we do, but we sure have fun.” I
 ultimately went to work elsewhere, but I occasionally wonder what it would
 have been like to work there. I don’t know what work I would be doing, but
 I’m sure I would have fun doing it. 
...organizations have the freedom to iterate and innovate early in
 the life cycle of their major products. As a project matures, the context
 becomes rigid, and innovation becomes “forced” and may appear in
 the guise of “innovation programs.” While these programs are good at
 the divergent thinking component of innovation, they rarely do a good
 job of convergent thinking. The result is that novelty, valued for its
 own sake, finds its way into mainstream development where it incurs
 costs but leads to results that range from indifferent to disaster; “home
 runs” are rare. The net result is most often negative. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
A project must accommodate major innovations but must also
 keep an eye on risk. It is too risky to innovate too much in project
 development. Some projects have “innovation programs” that value
 divergent thinking. The fruits of these efforts often make their way
 into development. It is only rarely that an organization does an honest
 evaluation of whether such ideas actually added value; the value is
 often taken on faith. For example, the latest technologies are always
 held to have value in their own right; conversion to OO, or to components, or to patterns, is considered “good” without a second thought.
 Too often, these new ideas have either indifferent results or in fact
 increase cost. They may decrease time to market or decrease cost, but if
 they decrease cost at the expense of time to market, then the overall
 effect is disastrous if time to market is the highest business priority.
 And, in fact, any new idea can both increase time to market and cost in
 ways that may never be noticed, in part because of the stock taken in
 the buzzword value of the idea. 
Yet projects become dead if there is no way to get paradigm shifts
 into the project now and then. 
Therefore: 
Allow a limited-cost SKUNK WORKS to form (as a SELF SELECTING TEAM (4.2.11)) to develop an idea outside the constraints of project
 development, to build confidence in the idea. Give the SKUNK WORKS
 organization ownership and credit for the idea. 
The organization is sustained by strong FIRE WALLS (4.2.9) that insulate it from the scrutiny of upper management and funders; in fact, the
 very existence of the SKUNK WORKS should be a secret. The idea is to
 keep the project off of management radar screens to foster the kind of
 innovation that leads to success before tradition and its constraints, as
 embodied in managers, can dampen innovation. 
The success of the idea is assessed according to the fruits of the
 SKUNK WORKS effort: the ability of the resulting product to attract customers willing to invest time, money or people in building the product
 or in otherwise furthering the idea. The product must tangibly show
 positive results that differentiate it from the mainstream product line;
 if it is to thrive over existing external and internal competitors, it must
 demonstrate distinguishing market superiority. Directly moving new
 ideas into the business units rarely works. As a practical matter, this
 evaluation of success and the ensuing steps to act on it happen at
 unusual places in the management structure: at a higher level of management, in an organization that has venture funding, or by using the
 leverage that marketing can bring from customer needs statements
 and customer commitments. However, the technology’s chance of
 long-term success is much higher if the skunkworks team includes
 developers who also have product responsibilities in existing products. They can become seeds for new development teams for the new
 products or, if they are very lucky, they can be conduits for introduction of the new technology into development organizations. Therefore,
 this pattern also depends on giving some small set of interested developers some limited amount of time to work with the SKUNK WORKS
 team in a GATE KEEPER (4.2.10) capacity. 
The SKUNK WORKS organization itself rarely can take a product all
 the way into production. It usually lacks the infrastructure, and sometimes the skill set, to build a solid product. This phenomenon is at the
 root of many well-known stories about large companies not being able
 to capitalize on their greatest inventions. 
If the idea succeeds, the team should reap the benefits of the idea.
 The organization subsidizes some of the risk of the team under the
 sponsorship of a PATRON ROLE (4.2.15), so that the risk-takers are guaranteed some minimum level of security even if they fail. However,
 they are not guaranteed the same level of rewards as people who succeed in lower-risk ventures; see COMPENSATE SUCCESS (4.2.25). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
This pattern is a bit different from BUILD PROTOTYPES (4.1.7). Prototyping is one strategy towards running a SKUNK WORKS; however, a
 SKUNK WORKS project may just buy an existing product and integrate it
 with existing products or market it differently without doing any prototyping. 
This pattern does not integrate with the other scheduling and organizational structures in the pattern language because it’s a decoupled
 effort. The effort should evolve into a product over time and eventually incorporate patterns like SIZE THE SCHEDULE (4.1.2) and SIZE THE
 ORGANIZATION (4.2.2), but only after it’s on its feet and has proven itself. 
It is important that the SKUNK WORKS be organizationally separate
 from the mainline organization. This allows so-called disruptive technologies to flourish within the company. (For further information on
 disruptive technologies, see works by Clayton Christiansen, professor
 at Harvard [Christianson1997].) 
Though it’s clear how SKUNK WORKS fit into a large organization, it
 can work on a smaller scale in small organizations as well. A couple of
 team members can develop innovative ideas “in the margins” as a side
 activity. This may be a particularly good outlet for employees whose
 skills are high enough that they seek challenges beyond those offered
 by day-to-day business.