 SUBSYSTEM BY SKILL *
 ...an organization of developers exists. They have different skills
 and specialties, but there is not yet any structure in the organization,
 nor in the system architecture, that reflects such specialization or
 interest. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Birds of a feather flock together. By CONWAY’S LAW (5.1.7), you want
 the architecture and organization to match each other. Yet there are
 many possible principles of organizing both the software and the organization that builds it. There is one structure that relates to domain
 knowledge and the system architecture; there is also a business structure, and a geographic structure as found in ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS
 LOCATION (5.1.8). But in ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION, each location
 is largely autonomous and has its own organizational decisions to
 make, so the issue remains of how to modularize the organizational
 structure locally. ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION conveys global constraints that relate to business priorities and concerns; CONWAY’S LAW
 offers guidance in the large, but doesn’t extend as well to the fine
 structure at the group level. And that structure—the primary low-level
 structure of the organization—relates to the subsystem structure. So:
 how do we help CONWAY’S LAW with a set of partitioning criteria? 
Therefore: 
Separate subsystems by staff skills and skill requirements. 
 ✥ ✥ ✥ 
This is a refinement of the pattern CONWAY’S LAW; it tells what criterion by which the structures of the organization should be aligned
 with those of the product. 
People skills tend to be relatively stable over time, so this organization protects against shifts in staff. 
The variation protected against here is the variation in staff skills
 over time. On a small enough project, the few people may have multiple skills that enable them to mix UI design with infrastructure
 design with domain design. Unhappily, their successors may not,
 which makes system evolution more difficult and costly. 
On larger projects, the many people are more likely to have single
 skills and specialties. If their code is intermingled, two expensive difficulties accrue: getting the different people to learn to understand each
 other and come to common decisions, and the same system evolution
 difficulty as with the smaller system. 
Separating their specialties into different subsystems lets them
 work with their special issues in their special vocabulary, lets their successors see those issues in isolation, and makes the project easier to
 staff, since the staff need not be so multidisciplinary. Once the subsystems are identified, various forms of teaming may be used to
 develop them. 
The pattern of course should be applied in moderation; too many
 subsystems means complex, slow software. And too fine of an organization structure is unwieldy and cumbersome. 
Note the relationship to DOMAIN EXPERTISE IN ROLES (4.2.22). This pattern removes one degree of freedom in DIVERSE GROUPS (4.2.16). 
Related subsystems may be connected, while still providing a
 degree of independence between teams by using STANDARDS LINKING
 LOCATIONS (5.2.12) from ORGANIZATIONAL MULTIPLEXING PATTERN LANGUAGE. 
UPSIDE DOWN MATRIX MANAGEMENT (5.1.19) is a way of handling SUBSYSTEM BY SKILL. 
Discussion 
Alistair Cockburn offers the following analysis of the relationship
 between HOLISTIC DIVERSITY (4.2.19) and SUBSYSTEM BY SKILL (4.2.23): 
 HOLISTIC DIVERSITY is aimed at streamlining communication: 
“For each function or set of functions to be delivered, create a 
small team... evolve specialists in requirements gathering, UI 
design, technical design, ...” “Evaluate the team as a single 
unit. Arrange the team size and location so they can commu
nicate directly.” “You will have to coordinate the teams to get 
the ... UI design, software architecture and so on consistent 
across teams.” 
 SUBSYSTEM BY SKILL is aimed at protecting the system against 
“variation in staff skills over time” — I thought of it primarily 
as a software design pattern, rather than a project management pattern, which is why I hadn’t thought of them 
together. “Many people are more likely to have single skills 
and specialties... Separate their specialties into different subsystems” 
What happens if you put the two together? You get the team 
structuring I described in my book ([Cockburn1998], p. 88) 
for a 40-person project: function teams (using HOLISTIC DIVERSITY), infrastructure teams, ARCHITECTURE TEAM, and technol
ogy teams. The UI gets its own subsystem, the domain model 
gets it own subsystem, the database gets its own subsystem... 
and now you have to use HOLISTIC DIVERSITY to get all the parts 
put back together to make a working system. Expertise from 
each specialty on each team (some team members bring more 
than one specialty with them). And you also have to run a UI 
group across function teams to get consistent UIs; a persistence and a domain group similarly to get consistency there, 
too. The software ends up partitioned by skill. So you work 
extra hard to see that the teams don’t get similarly segregated. This is the stuff that my book covers, in its tiny way. 
What happens if you don’t put the two together? If you don’t 
do SUBSYSTEM BY SKILL, then you get UI, domain, persistence, 
networking code all mixed together. Yuck, but that’s well 
known. Why have we long separated these things? Because 
they change independently or because they capitalize on different specialties?, or we have those specialties because they 
change independently or they change independently because 
we have those specialties? 
 I don’t know and won’t guess. 
What if you don’t do HOLISTIC DIVERSITY? Then you get a room 
full of UI designers, another room full of domain modelers, 
another room full of persistence designers / db designers, 
etc. I think we have all seen enough of this and its negative 
consequences. I am, by the way, currently in an organization 
separated this way, and trying to get the people, who sit only 
steps apart, to talk to each other on microteams. 
So I think we need both: a project management pattern and a 
software architecture pattern, that work together.