UNITY OF PURPOSE **
 ...the team is beginning to come together. Team members may come
 from different backgrounds and may bring many different experiences. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Many projects have rocky beginnings as people struggle to work
 together. 
Often, the people have different ideas about what the final product
 should be. In fact, the final product may well be a pretty fuzzy conept. Yet the people must have a consistent view of the product if there
 is any hope of it getting done. 
Each person is different and has different views and opinions. They
 come with different backgrounds and experiences. They must learn to
 work together. 
It is important to get off to a good start — initial impressions, good
 or bad, tend to be lasting. 
Therefore, 
The leader of the project must instill a common vision and pur   pose in all the members of the team. This “leader” can be a manager,
 or the PATRON ROLE (4.2.15), or a customer advocate, but should be
 someone who holds the team’s respect and who has influence over the
 team’s thinking. This is an overt action; you can’t count on it happening automatically. The leader should make sure everyone agrees
 on the following: What is the product supposed to do? Who are the
 customers, and how will it help them? What is the schedule, and
 everyone must feel personally committed to the schedule. Who is the
 competition? 
An important component of this action is to identify strengths of
 the team, and use them as rallying points as well. This is related to
 identifying the challenges and competition, and uniting to overcome
 and surpass them. 
As time goes on, the UNITY OF PURPOSE continues to emerge from
 ongoing dialogue within the team and with customers and other
 stakeholders. While the team leader primes the pump, team dynamics
 take over and keep things going. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The obvious result is that the team is on the same page, and is
 working together, rather than at cross purposes. But a more subtle, but
 probably more powerful effect is what it does for the morale of the
 team. The best teams tend to feel that they are somehow better than
 others — and they work to prove it! 
This pattern relates to some deep-seated principles and values of
 organizational health. There may be no more important single property of an organization than that its members have a shared vision
 they are motivated to achieve. Communication—which receives the
 bulk of the attention in this book—is just a means to achieving that
 shared vision. UNITY OF PURPOSE is a deeper principle even than effective communication; communications are just a means to UNITY OF
 PURPOSE. 
Related Patterns: 
SHARED CLEAR VISION (10.5.25) ([Bramble2002], p. 80) notes the
 importance of a clear vision in creating unity, from the point of view of
 writing use cases. SELF SELECTING TEAM (4.2.11) outlines how a team
 should come together, but that alone is insufficient to achieve UNITY OF
 PURPOSE. LOCK ’EM UP TOGETHER (5.2.5) helps achieve unity, particularly
 of architecture. A GATE KEEPER (4.2.10) can help. It can help the team be
 more unified on what requirements to ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6). This
 pattern sets up COMPENSATE SUCCESS (4.2.25): it’s much easier to compensate success when everyone knows what success means. And
 while UNITY OF PURPOSE is important to galvanize the team, effective
 team dynamics can come only if every team member is also valued as
 an individual: HOLISTIC DIVERSITY (4.2.19) comes to play here. 
