BUILD PROTOTYPES **
 ...you are trying to gather requirements necessary for test planning,
 as in the pattern APPLICATION DESIGN IS BOUNDED BY TEST DESIGN (4.2.30),
 and for the architecture, as for the pattern ARCHITECT ALSO IMPLEMENTS
 (5.2.10). Some of these requirements come from the customer, but
 some are design decisions that come from the structure of the solution
 itself. For example, you may be building a user interface, some new
 technology such as database or network technology, or you are
 working on a new, critical algorithm, or don’t understand your project
 domain. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
A project must test requirements and design decisions to reduce
 the risk of wasted cost and missed expectations. 
You need knowledge to proceed on development, and you must
 move forward; yet, requirements (or your understanding of them) are
 always changing. 
You’re missing information about the product (not the process), and
 you have a best guess you can use to move forward, and you want
 some way to evaluate the result of your best guess. 
 Written requirements that are gathered once at the beginning of a
 development cycle with the hope that they can drive development are
 usually too ambiguous. 
You want to get requirements changes as early as possible, and you
 want requirements understanding to lead deployment by as far as possible. 
Designers and implementors must understand requirements
 directly — that the requirements have been captured in a document
 isn’t enough. And for designers and developers to understand requirements implies that they must understand the implementation ramifications. 
Therefore: 
Build an isolated prototype solution whose purposes are: 
• to understand requirements, including latent needs, 
• to validate requirements with customers as in ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6); 
• to explore human/computer interactions for the system; 
• to explore the cost and benefits of design decisions. 
The prototype is a small system that explores a small number of
 issues in isolation using best current knowledge. By examining that
 small system you can learn whether your current knowledge is correct
 and sufficient. Prototypes are particularly useful for external interfaces. 
Throw the prototype away when you’re done. This is more important than it may sound. Since the purpose of prototyping is to gain
 knowledge, prototypes can (and should) ignore details necessary in
 production software. Yet such details (such as scale, performance,
 robustness, etc.) cannot be incorporated into prototype-based software
 without the result resembling the proverbial bowl of pasta. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
You will decide that your current knowledge is or is not sufficient. If
 it is, adapt that small system’s design (not code!) to your larger system
 (incorporate it entirely if it was built to production specifications). If
 not, decide whether you now have enough information to safely proceed, or whether you need to do another Prototype. 
 It’s good to use DEVELOPING IN PAIRS (4.2.28), particularly if one of the
 pair represents the customer interests or is a customer per se. 
Prototypes are a good supplement to use cases to help more thoroughly to assess requirements. For one thing, prototypes help bring
 unstated requirements into the open. This pattern nicely complements
 ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6) and SCENARIOS DEFINE PROBLEM (4.2.8). 
The processes of the visualizations used for DEVELOPER CONTROLS
 PROCESS (4.1.17), and the pattern ENGAGE QUALITY ASSURANCE (4.2.29), are
 based largely on prototyping. 
Continued prototyping without convergence means that the design
 is constantly shifting, and the team is not learning enough to reach a
 conclusion. If other teams that depend on the prototyping team do not
 get the stable interface they need, it is time to get out of prototyping
 and either implement or ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6) (RECOMMITMENT MEETING (4.1.12)) to evaluate current project directions and priorities. 
There are subtle organizational overtones to building prototypes. It
 is important that the ARCHITECT CONTROLS PRODUCT (5.2.3), and not the
 prototype control the product. Therefore, the prototyping team should
 be kept separate from the Architect and ARCHITECTURE TEAM (5.2.4).
 Instead, the prototyping activity helps enhance the DOMAIN EXPERTISE IN
 ROLES (4.2.22). And one of the positive effects of building a prototype is
 to reduce the risk of the unknown. The prototype helps to define the
 scope of the problem as well as a possible solution. 
Related patterns: 
• EARLY AND REGULAR DELIVERY (10.5.11) - adds knowledge about
 your development process. 
•MICROCOSM (10.5.18) - returns measurable data about process and
 technology. 
Another related pattern is Alistair Cockburn’s CLEAR THE FOG
 (10.5.7) [Cockburn1998], which one might view as a generic version of
 this pattern. In that pattern, Alistair recommends “Do something
 (almost anything) that is a best initial attempt to deliver some part of
 the system in a short period of time” in the interest of SOMEONE ALWAYS
 MAKES PROGRESS (4.1.20). He gives as rationale, “The difficulty is that
 you don’t know what it is that you don’t know. Only by making some
 movement can you detect what it is you don’t know. Once you come to
 know what it is you don’t know, you can pursue that information
 directly.” And he adds an interesting admonition: “If you only ’clear
 the fog’ and ’clear the fog’ and ’clear the fog’, you will not make real
 progress. You will have lots of little experiments and no deliverable
 results.” 
Bruce Whitenack’s RAPPeL pattern language also presents a PROTOTYPES (10.5.23) pattern ([Whitenack1995], p. 288). He adds the admoni
tion: 
The dark side to prototyping is that solutions can be hacked 
together with the software inadequately robust and not well designed. It takes maturity, discipline and a very good programming/design environment to reengineer quality back 
into a product. Without rigor and discipline a product is in 
serious risk of failure when features are continually added. 
As more prototyping and evaluating are done, there will be 
the need to modify the requirements. Iteration between prototyping and use-case modeling occurs during requirements 
analysis. In addition, user expectations have to kept realistic 
as a prototype is not a product. Customers must realize that 
what they are seeing is a product simulation — not the product itself. 
He also distinguishes between lo-fidelity prototypes and hi-fidelity prototypes: 
Work with the customer to build (initially) low-fidelity prototypes... using paper widgets, drawings, self-stick notes, and 
index cards. (These are true throwaway prototypes). Or, if the 
necessary skills and tools are available, build high-fidelity 
prototypes. (You do not want to spend more that 10 percent 
of your time on how to use the tool instead of focusing on the 
actual prototype, however). Alternate between prototyping 
and use-case modeling. Prototyping provides more user 
involvement, and use case modeling provides rigorous analysis. Augment the use case documentation with references to prototype versions (product simulations). 
The high fidelity prototypes that are developed with a tool capable
 of generating useful code may be used for evolutionary development.
 It may not be a throwaway prototype but should be developed with
 the spirit that it will be thrown away. This means making sure that all
 on the project — especially managers — understand that the prototype
 may be thrown away. It has been my experience with Smalltalk development that if the developer has a good design in mind and if he is
 experienced, the prototype will probably contain code that is very
 usable for a production version. Be sure to plan for training of beta
 users and for doing a number of prototypes for perspective users. 
Building and demonstrating prototypes is an art in itself. See the
 excellent pattern language, “DEMO PREP (10.5.9),” by Todd Coram
 [Coram1996] for guidance on the building, administration, and demonstration of prototypes. See also an earlier work by Ian Graham
 [Graham1991]. 
The risk to your project of a small, throw-away effort is a small
 schedule delay. The risk of making a poor technical choice is a poor
 product, or perhaps committing to a technology that simply will not
 work. 
Be careful not to be seduced by the siren song of a successful prototype. Prototypes almost never can demonstrate capacity, reliability, or
 performance. But these are often the most troublesome issues in development. The danger is that we see a prototype working, and naturally
 assume that it will scale gracefully, will run for weeks without rebooting, or will perform nimbly under a typical customer’s load. A
 working prototype does not imply that these problems are solved. 
Contrast this pattern with SKUNK WORKS (4.2.14), which many think
 of as prototyping on a larger scale, but which is actually a little bit different in its forces and intent. 
“The best friend of the architect is the pencil in the drafting room,
 and the sledgehammer on the job.” — Frank Lloyd Wright, quoted in
 [Jacobs1978].