 COMMUNITY OF TRUST **
 In high school, I went to music camp one year. During one orchestra
 rehearsal, my section was struggling with a particularly difficult passage. The
 conductor asked about it, and I said, “Don’t worry. We will have it
 tomorrow.” He said, “Ok,” and continued with the rehearsal. By the next day,
 we had indeed learned the passage. 
... once an organization has been established, interpersonal relationships have a significant positive or negative impact on the effectiveness of the team. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
It is essential that the people in a team trust each other, otherwise,
 it will be difficult to get anything done. Communication is essential to the smooth working of any team; for
 example, software developers must constantly talk to each other to
 coordinate interfaces, builds, and tests. If individuals do not trust each
 other, communication will not be smooth. 
If people do not trust each other, they will spend time in defensive
 mode. For example, if I don’t believe you will provide me a certain
 interface on time, I might go to great lengths to code around it, costing
 extra work and time. 
Design reviews can foment distrust. All too often, design reviews
 are contests among the reviewers to show who is more clever, and thus
 do not provide helpful suggestions to the designer. One alternative is
 for people to put on their best social behavior in reviews, but that
 dampens the energetic discussions that lead to the best insights in
 group discussions. 
The organization might have policies that smell of distrust: one may
 have to jump through hoops to be allowed to submit code to the
 project base. 
The perception of trust or mistrust is the reality, regardless of the
 intention. 
Therefore: 
Do things that explicitly demonstrate trust, so it is obvious. Managers, for example, should make it overtly obvious that they are at
 the side of the organization, rather than playing a central role that
 controls people to do what must be done. Take visible actions to give
 developers control over the process. 
The key here is that the actions must be visible and obvious, particularly if they are removing onerous rules and processes. Shortly before
 I went to work at a certain company, the company dispensed with time
 clocks for research and development personnel. My co-workers spoke
 fondly of the time clock smashing ceremony they had. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
This is different from the oft-cited “empowerment” strategy.
 Empowerment is a conscious abdication of control to lower levels (see
 THE OPEN CLOSED PRINCIPLE OF TEAMS (6.1.4)). In a COMMUNITY OF TRUST,
 progress is more often made by bilateral agreement than by unilateral
 directions. If people feel they have a voice and have influence over
 decisions, they are more likely to trust those who make the decisions.
 By the same token, they are likely to be more responsive in carrying
 out responsibilities they have committed to themselves over responsibilities that have been “given” to them. In fact, you can’t give someone
 responsibility; you can only give someone accountability. Responsibility is taken, not given. One of the most demoralizing things a manager can do is to give accountability in the absence of responsibility. 
You need trust between the customer and all team members to lay
 out project plans that extend from SIZE THE SCHEDULE (4.1.2) in the
 PROJECT MANAGEMENT PATTERN LANGUAGE (4.1). The same is true for role
 differentiation; giving everyone pride and individuality can contribute
 to trust, as in SIZE THE ORGANIZATION (4.2.2) and its subtending patterns
 in the PIECEMEAL GROWTH PATTERN LANGUAGE (4.2). Start building trust
 by starting small with FEW ROLES (5.1.2), and let this principle guide the
 ORGANIZATIONAL STYLE PATTERN LANGUAGE (5.1). To keep people from
 working defensively, one needs a team spirit; this is true ARCHITECT
 CONTROLS PRODUCT (5.2.3) and subtending patterns relating to PEOPLE
 AND CODE PATTERN LANGUAGE (5.2). COMMUNITY OF TRUST provides a foundation for many other patterns,
 such as UNITY OF PURPOSE (4.2.12), PATRON ROLE (4.2.15), FIRE WALLS
 (4.2.9), DEVELOPER CONTROLS PROCESS (4.1.17), RESPONSIBILITIES ENGAGE
 (5.1.14), and more. 
So why is this a separate pattern? It has a specific structural impact:
 it is about nurturing communication paths, and has some positional
 impact (in particular, it encourages manager roles away from the
 center.) Second, the visible nature of the actions is important; we
 haven’t captured that in any of the other patterns. 
Trust is contagious, and spreads most effectively through an organization from the top down.