DEVELOPMENT EPISODE *
 A baseball game is divided into separate episodes, called innings. 
...members of a WORK GROUP have been selected based on needs
 inferred from the IMPLIED REQUIREMENTS (4.1.16). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
It’s important to build on the collective strength of an entire team
 and to build a true gestalt from the team members. 
Each member brings specific skills which will be important at some
 point in the development. For this we can be thankful. However, if we
 overemphasize a member’s specific strength, we diminish everyone’s
 general abilities, unnecessarily narrow the members focus to applying
 just that specialty, risk creating ambiguity as to who is responsible for
 non-specialized tasks, and discourage the learning of new skills. 
Therefore: 
Approach all development as a group activity as if no one had
 anything else to do. Expect the activity to follow the usual course of
 an episode where energy builds to a decision-making climax and
 then dissipates. At the height of the episode, purpose should be
 clear, terminology well understood, knowns well explored and
 unknowns identified. It is at exactly this point that individual
 strengths merge into a sort of common consciousness. Landmark
 decisions come easy. Breakthroughs are common. A creative act will
 have been shared. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Besides yielding better decisions, the collective episode has very
 positive effects on the participants. Looking back, people often have
 trouble identifying the actual source of key ideas. Non-specialists gain
 invaluable insight into the thought processes of the specialist. A specialty is demystified, shared, spread throughout the group. A master
 of a specialty will realize that this sharing will not diminish one’s own
 status within the group. As insight wells up in the master, he will
 delay slightly, expecting others to be close to the same insight, and
 knowing that their actual recognition experience will be of tremendous value to them and a small loss to himself. Seymour Papert called
 this an “Ah Ha” and admonished instructors not to “Steal the Ah Ha”
 [Papert1980]. 
A version of this pattern first appeared in [Cunningham1996].