DEVELOPER CONTROLS PROCESS **
 A journeyman devises effective and efficient processes for manufacture of selfsealing fuel tanks, WW II. 
...an organization has come together to build software for a new
 market in an immature domain, or in a domain which is unfamiliar to
 the development team. Progress will be marked by an INFORMAL LABOR
 PLAN (4.1.14). The necessary roles have been defined and initially
 staffed. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
A development culture, like any culture, can benefit from recognizing a focal point of project direction and communication. Successful organizations work in an organic way with a minimum of
 centralized control. Yet there are important points of focus, embodied
 in roles, that tie together the ideas, requirements, and constraints into
 an artifact ready for testing, packaging, marketing, and delivery. 
Totalitarian control is viewed by most development teams as a draconian measure. The right information must flow through the right
 roles. You need to support information flow across analysis, design,
 and implementation. 
 Because developers contribute directly to the end-user-visible artifact, they are in the best position to take accountability for the product.
 Of all roles, they have the largest stake in the largest number of phases
 of product development. And there should be no accountability
 without control. The MANAGER ROLE has some accountability as well, to
 the extent that it indirectly supports delivery of the user-visible artifacts. These are process issues. 
Therefore: 
Make the Developer the focal point of process information. Place
 the Developer role at a hub of the process for a given feature, in the
 spirit of ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS MARKET (5.1.9). A feature is a unit of
 system functionality (implemented largely in software) that can be
 separately marketed, and for which customers are willing to pay.
 Responsibilities of Developers include understanding requirements,
 reviewing the solution structure and algorithm with peers, building
 the implementation, and unit testing. 
The developer is central to all activities of this end-to-end software
 development process. 
Note that other hubs, such as the MANAGER ROLE, may exist as well,
 though they are less central than the Developer. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The Developer who is at the hub of a particular feature may be
 accorded that position according to FUNCTION OWNER AND COMPONENT
 OWNER but, more generally, the developer should be at the communication hub of whatever process engages them in writing code for the
 customer. This pattern encourages a structure that supports its prime
 information consumer. The Developer can be moved toward the center
 of the process using patterns WORK FLOWS INWARD (4.1.18) and MOVE
 RESPONSIBILITIES (5.1.18). Though Developer should be a key role, care
 must be taken not to overburden it. This pattern should be balanced
 with MERCENARY ANALYST (4.1.24), FIRE WALLS (4.2.9), GATE KEEPER
 (4.2.10), and more general load-balancing patterns like HALLWAY
 CHATTER (5.1.15), RESPONSIBILITIES ENGAGE (5.1.14), and MOVE RESPONSIBILITIES (5.1.18). Conflicts can be escalated to the PATRON ROLE (4.2.15) when
 consensus breaks down. and the Developer should enjoy particularly
 strong support from the PATRON ROLE (4.2.15). 
If the Developer controls the process, then it’s possible to have
 WORK FLOWS INWARD (4.1.18). 
Developers of course don’t “control” the process unilaterally, but as
 a collective group, starting with DEVELOPING IN PAIRS (4.2.28). 
We have no role called Designer because design is really the whole
 task. Managers fill a supporting role; empirically, they are rarely seen
 to control a process except during crises. While the Developer controls
 the process, the Architect controls the product. (In the figure, the
 Architect role is split across FRAMEWORK OWNER and ARCHITECTURE TEAM
 (5.2.4).) This communication is particularly important in domains that
 are not well understood, so that iteration can take place to explore the
 domain with the customer. 
In a mature domain, consider HUB SPOKE AND RIM (5.1.17) as an
 alternative. 
You can still write down your process as part of a process improvement program. But keep the documentation light; many organizations
 have found that one page per process is good enough. And make sure
 each process step meets a need that you can tie to your organization’s
 value proposition. Most often, this value is or should be tied to the
 product you are producing for a paying customer. If it isn’t obvious
 how the process step helps achieve what you know the customer
 wants, the do the right thing instead.