 INTERRUPTS UNJAM BLOCKING **
 During one project status meeting, it was reported that a critical piece of
 hardware was malfunctioning. Unfortunately, the expert on the hardware
 was on the other side of the country, and was involved in his own work. But
 he had the (mis)fortune to be on that conference call. So was the project
 director, who informed him in blunt terms that his services were required
 immediately. He was on the next plane out. 
... you are fine-tuning scheduling in a high productivity design/
 implementation process or low-latency service process. The scheduling problem is to be addressed on a small scale (i.e., this is not scheduling entire departments, but the work of cooperating individuals).
 You want to use INFORMAL LABOR PLAN (4.1.14), but need additional criteria for individuals and small groups to plan their schedules. Local
 decisions may lack the scope necessary to avoid duplication of work,
 missed opportunities, and other sillinesses.    
A comprehensive scheduling plan is difficult if not impossible;
 yet, without some kind of plan, it becomes easy to fall into
 thrashing. 
The events and tasks in a process are too complex to schedule
 development activities as a time-linear sequence. 
 Complete scheduling insight is impossible. Even if it were possible
 to capture the entire picture of the project for an instant, it would
 change very quickly. The dynamics of project development mean that
 the best we can hope for is a high-level, approximate schedule. 
The programmers with the longest development schedules will
 benefit if more of others’ code is done before they try integrating or
 testing later code, and their interval can’t otherwise be shortened (see
 CODE OWNERSHIP (5.2.13)). 
Therefore: 
If a role is about to block on a critical resource, interrupt the role
 that provides that resource so they stop what they’re doing to keep
 you unblocked. 
The nature of the critical resource can vary. It may be a software
 module that is in the critical path. It could be the latest software integration. It is often critical knowledge, without which one cannot move
 forward. Whatever the resource is, the approach is to interrupt the provider of the resource. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
If the overhead is small enough, it doesn’t affect throughput. It will
 always improve local latency. 
The process should have a higher throughput, again, at the expense
 of higher coupling. Coupling may have already been facilitated by earlier patterns, such as WORK FLOWS INWARD (4.1.18), MOVE RESPONSIBILITIES
 (5.1.18), RESPONSIBILITIES ENGAGE (5.1.14), HALLWAY CHATTER (5.1.15), and
 COUPLING DECREASES LATENCY (5.1.22). 
The intent is that this pattern will apply most frequently between
 cooperating developers working on a single project. This is supported
 empirically from a high productivity process in AT&T. There are
 strong software engineering (operating system) principles as well. 
It may be useful to prioritize interrupts, and service the ones that
 would optimize the productivity of the organization as a whole. That
 is, it is better to unblock 4 people who are currently blocked than to
 unblock a single squeaky wheel. The decision-making process should
 be fast: Most of the time, it should be distributed. Where arbitration is
 needed, apply PATRON ROLE (4.2.15). The simplest resolution is the pattern DON’T INTERRUPT AN INTERRUPT (4.1.26). 
 The PATRON ROLE (4.2.15) and MANAGER ROLE can help the team audit
 the project for blocked progress, but should defer to the Developers (or
 other directly impacted roles) to resolve the blockage when ever possible. Management intervention can be effective, but may risk good
 will within the project. 
Joe Maranzano notes a corollary to this pattern is another pattern:
 Don’t put too many critical tasks on one person (which is related to
 MODERATE TRUCK NUMBER (4.2.24) and DISTRIBUTE WORK EVENLY (5.1.13)). 
This pattern is much less effective if the provider of the resource is
 not in the same project as you are. In that case, the provider has little
 incentive to service your interrupt, and you risk alienating the provider if you engage in incessant pestering. This problem can be mitigated by adopting a policy of reciprocity, fair and proactive exchange
 of value among partners. [Dikel2001].