PROGRAMMING EPISODE **
 Making the possible decision now: what kind of candy can I buy with my 
nickel? 
...you have a good idea on where to start and perhaps even some
 fledgling pieces of code. Now you need to get on to establishing a
 rhythm of productive development that can engage and fuel the team. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Programming is the act of deciding now what will happen in the
 future, but it always seems like parts of the future don’t happen
 soon enough and parts of it are always too far off and out of reach. A
 programming language offers an operationally precise way to encode
 decisions through a process called simply coding. Programmers
 reason about future behavior by interpreting previously coded decisions and integrating these with their own decisions and their interpretations of other sources like TECHNICAL MEMOS and domain experts.
 The depth, quality and value of programming decisions will be limited
 by the programmers ability to concentrate. 
Therefore: 
Develop a program in discrete episodes. Select appropriate deliverables for an episode and commit sufficient mind share to deliver
 them. Do this by making the possible decisions now, and coding
 those decisions. Be aware of the rise in concentration as the episode
 progresses. Consider each source (above) and consciously include or
 exclude its recommendations. 
 ✥ ✥ ✥ 
Use the fear that often accompanies a decision not-yet-made as a
 motivation. Try to compare your position within an episode to similar
 points in previously successful episodes. 
Example: 
“I feel like we’ve been around twice now on the possible ways we can bind
 the six terms of this bond analytic to the four calculation classes we have in
 our library.” 
“Yeah, right now I’d be happy if we could place the four primary terms,
 look at the error cases, and see if that gives us a hint how to proceed after
 lunch.” 
Push for the decisions that can be made. Don’t abandon an episode;
 that will leave you feeling defeated and unable to achieve even the
 same level of concentration at a future time. Make the decisions that
 seem possible. Code the decisions. Then review the code to be sure
 that the extent of your decisions and your confidence in them is
 apparent in the code. Coding occurs on the down-hill side of a programming episode. Coding is the most direct way to promulgate programming decisions. 
A version of this pattern first appeared as [Cunningham1996].