 SACRIFICE ONE PERSON *
 Other names: “Sacrificial Lamb” 
... during a typical project, there are always a host of small distractions. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Small distractions can add up, and sap the strength of the team. 
Even small distractions must be handled. But they take time away
 from the primary task. In particular, any distraction, even a small one,
 disrupts “flow” time, which costs significant additional time to regain. 
Many small distractions are less desirable jobs. 
Therefore: 
Assign just one person to it until it gets handled. 
This is very much like TEAM PER TASK (4.1.21), except the distraction
 is smaller; it could seemingly be handled by one person half-time to
 full-time. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The main group of the team moves forward distraction free. The
 person assigned to the distracting task may be unhappy, so try to get
 that person back on the team again as soon as possible. If you feel that
 one person is too much to sacrifice to this task and want to make it part
 time work, compute the loss of flow time that would result from trying
 to work this distraction and some other task. 
If this keeps happening, you will have no one performing the primary task, and you ought to examine why you have so many distractions in the first place. 
OWNER PER DELIVERABLE (10.5.19) is the general ownership and
 accountability pattern. SOMEONE ALWAYS MAKES PROGRESS (4.1.20) is the
 general distraction management pattern. TEAM PER TASK (4.1.21) is the
 general form of this pattern at the team level. 
Several patterns refine this pattern for specific contexts. DAY CARE
 (4.1.23) addresses training as a separate deliverable from the software,
 and produces mentor as a profession. In FIRE WALLS (4.2.9), the distraction is a series of requests from outside the team, so one of the developers is sacrificed to act as project manager. That can produce project
 manager as a profession. The MERCENARY ANALYST (4.1.24) handles the
 distraction of documentation, usually a “hired gun” who takes care of
 it, leading to technical writing as a profession. And in GATE KEEPER
 (4.2.10), the constant inflow of technical information is the distraction,
 and one person is assigned managing that information as a distinct,
 part-time task. It is one of the major foundations for manager as a profession. 
Don’t forget the sacrificial lamb when it comes time to COMPENSATE SUCCESS (4.2.25). 
Principles involved: 
As for TEAM PER TASK (4.1.21). The fact that handling the distraction looks less than a full-time job illustrates the significance of the time spent getting into mental flow. 
Maximum parallelism, profession, or sacrifice? If the people 
do not like the task, they consider it a sacrifice. If they like the 
task, it becomes their profession. Thus, FIRE WALLS gives rise 
to the profession of project management, DAY CARE gives rise 
to the profession of mentor. 
Sample situations: 
A. Updating the project schedule. On Project Winifred, the schedule
 was out of date. We thought it would be fair to let each person on each
 team evaluate their own work. That would spread the experience, discomfort and load. What really happened was that progress came to a
 total halt. When the design team got back to designing, a month had
 gone by with no design progress, and they had forgotten some of the
 design issues that had been in their head. One of the teams used SACRIFICE ONE PERSON (4.1.22). They drew lots, for one person to do the
 whole team’s estimation while the others got on with the main task. At
 the end of several weeks of estimation, that team had moved forward
 while the other teams were at a standstill. Thereafter, every team
 applied the pattern. The person working on the schedule really felt
 sacrificed. This pattern was originally called “Scylla”, as described in
 the story of Scylla and Charybdis. 
B. Simultaneous release to QA and development of the next release. 
Project Winifred had one increment entering test at the same time
 design was starting on the next. We optimistically thought the bug
 fixes would take a relatively small amount of time, and so assigned the
 whole team to both fixing bugs and doing new design. 
Each fix broke a designer’s train of thought for a period of time on
 the order of an hour, beyond just the fix. Three or four of these caused
 the designer to lose most of the day. Eventually, the designers gave up
 on the new release, because they knew the next bug fix would arrive
 before they would had recovered their thoughts and progressed on the
 new design. 
We applied SACRIFICE ONE PERSON (4.1.22), and assigned one person
 to bug fixes. We originally planned it as a half-time job, but found
 there was not enough time left over for the person to do any useful
 design. The person rejoined the new design team as soon as the release
 went through test. 
A version of this pattern first appeared in [Cockburn1998].