WORK QUEUE *
 ...IMPLIED REQUIREMENTS (4.1.16) suggest deliverable program
 enhancements which will have various necessities, dependencies,
 risks and rewards. Deliverables may be ill-defined, being represented
 more by a vision or desire than by anything concrete or measurable. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
It is difficult to do linear, monochronic scheduling in light of
 IMPLIED REQUIREMENTS. 
If we were to work up a conventional schedule we would probably
 begin with a block of requirements analysis for each item. From these
 would be hung blocks of specification, design, implementation and
 eventually integration and testing. Add to this some wild guesses and
 a few ordering constraints and, presto, thirty feet of diagram saying
 what will be finished when and by whom. Such a document takes on a
 life of its own striking fear in developer’s hearts and generally distracting everyone else from the real scheduling task which is to get
 better input, not larger output. 
Therefore: 
 Produce a schedule that is simply a prioritized list of work. Use
 the list of IMPLIED REQUIREMENTS (4.1.16) (really just names) as a
 starting point and order them into a likely implementation order
 favoring the more urgent or higher priority items. When work can be
 factored from two or more entries, go ahead and do so giving the
 common element a name that establishes its worth and implies its
 implementation precedence. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Example: 
1. Settlement-Date Positions 
2. Settlement-Date Based Tax Reports 
3. Trade vs. Settlement Accounting Preference by Portfolio 
Be prepared to reorder this list as unforeseen interactions surface or
 business realities demand new priorities. Remove work from the list as
 it is completed. Observed defects is not enough to return completed
 work to the list. However, independently scheduled repair activity
 may uncover omissions that are more appropriately removed from
 defect tracking and scheduled in competition with all of the other
 work on the WORK QUEUE (4.1.13). 
A version of this pattern first appeared in [Cunningham1996]. The
 pattern is similar to the later SCRUM pattern “Backlog” [Beedle1999,
 643-644], which is summarized in [Rising2000, 146]: 
To organize the work remaining on a project, maintain a prioritized list, the Backlog. The list is dynamic and updated at the end of each Sprint. 