DECOUPLE STAGES 
 ...a design and implementation process have been established for a
 well-understood domain. Well-understood, high-context domains
 have less need for patterns like BUILD PROTOTYPES (4.1.7) and can actually proceed well according to a standard waterfall model. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Development stages should be independent to reduce coupling
 and promote autonomy of teams and developers. There is a tradition
 of decoupling architecture, design, and coding in a development pro
cess. While this doesn’t make sense for most software development —
 and is especially suspect for greenfield development — it sometimes
 makes sense in mature, high-context development projects. But there
 is still a trade-off: while independence creates opportunities for parallelism, it also hampers information flow. 
Therefore: 
For known and mature domains, serialize the steps. Hand offs
 between steps should take place via well-defined interfaces. This
 makes it possible to automate one or more of the steps, or to create a
 pattern that lets inexpert staff carry out the step. 
 ✥ ✥ ✥ 
The new organization allows for specialization in carrying out parts
 of the process, rather than emphasizing specialization in solving the
 customer problem. 
This approach is “safe” only for well-understood domains, where
 the mapping from needs to implementation is straightforward.
 Domains that are well-understood are also good candidates for mechanization. For less mature domains, the process should build on the
 creativity of those involved at each stage of the process, and there
 should be more parallelism and interworking. 
You can afford to do this in high-context, mature areas because the
 patterns of work are repeatable and rarely bring surprises. That means
 that each stage can be carried out independently. That means less communication between stages, which means better efficiency. One can
 further raise the efficiency by building on specializations and domain
 knowledge pertinent to individual stages. Example domains include
 database administration (with steps such as database modeling, normalization, and query optimization), packaging, delivery and installation, and many administrative functions like bug tracking or the high
level business processes supporting field error report resolution. 
Though interfaces between process steps help insulate the steps
 from each other, these interfaces should also be effective and useful.
 These interfaces shouldn’t exist for their own sake or empire-building,
 or even to establish formal organization boundaries. They should
 encapsulate well-understood domains of control that ease hand offs
 between stages. If the interfaces increase cost and latency, they are
 wrong: either they have been implemented improperly or they
 shouldn’t be there at all. 
This pattern prepares for HUB SPOKE AND RIM (5.1.17).