FORM FOLLOWS FUNCTION
 Visitors’ overlook building at Kentucky Dam. This structure is in the form of 
an open shed because the other functions of TVA (Tennessee Valley Authority) 
visitors’ buildings being accommodated in the nearby construction village, 
there was need for shelter only at this point. Since the project is in a hot climate, ample ventilation is promoted by the open front, a balustrade height 
opening toward the back underneath the display and grilles to ventilate the 
roof space. Most of the displays are arranged as transparencies, with natural 
illumination during the day, and with floodlights used as substitutes during 
the night. 
...you know the key atomic process activities, but there is little specialization and few well-defined roles. People don’t know where to
 turn for answers to questions. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
A project must delineate well-defined roles to help identify and
 leverage expertise relevant to emerging problems. 
Individual activities are too small, and their sequencing relationships too dynamic, to be useful process building blocks. 
You could build talent lists of the individuals in an organization
 and partition the work among them, but that makes the organization
 sensitive to personnel changes. And it would be nice to sometimes be
 able to talk about the organization structure at a higher level of
 abstraction than individuals. 
You could organize around classical roles such as “developer” and
 “designer” and “manager,” but that’s only a partial solution. These
 roles don’t apply to all organizations, and stereotypical roles can’t generalize to a wide range of domains. 
Activities often cluster together by related artifacts or other domain
 relationships. 
You want to match up specialization, expertise and experience
 when staffing an organization. 
Therefore: 
Group closely related activities (that is, those mutually coupled in
 their implementation, or which manipulate the same artifacts, or
 that are semantically related to the same domain). Name the abstractions resulting from the grouped activities, making them into roles.
 The associated activities become the responsibilities (job description)
 of the roles. Roles, rather than activities, become the basic project
 building blocks. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
For example, if a project depends heavily on a software library,
 there should be some ownership (see CODE OWNERSHIP (5.2.13))
 embodied in a role such as Librarian. The Librarian has responsibilities
 and social communication patterns distinct from those of a developer,
 which makes it a separate role. Other roles such as Vendor Coordinator,
 Rules Developer, or Computer Graphics Artist speak to the function of the
 organization and its product. 
Other roles convey more subtle aspects of organizational function
 and structure. One organization featured the roles Code Police and Agitator, reflecting a lighthearted attitude towards what might otherwise
 be considered onerous functions. 
This approach yields a partial definition of project roles. Some roles
 (MERCENARY ANALYST (4.1.24), developer, architect, GATE KEEPERETC.) are
 canonical, rather than deriving from this pattern. Those roles, too, are
 in concert with this pattern, though at a more generic level. 
The idea was used in a large project re-engineering effort that Jim
 Coplien worked with in March of 1994. 
 Louis Sullivan is the architect credited with the primordial architectural pattern of this name ([Rybczynski1989], p. 162). 
This pattern interacts with other structural patterns such as ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION (5.1.8), ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS MARKET (5.1.9),
 and ARCHITECT ALSO IMPLEMENTS (5.2.10). Also see ENGAGE CUSTOMERS
 (4.2.6). 
One manager notes: “In my experience from Project Management
 Audits ... projects both leave out roles (e.g., no named architect) and
 define several people with the same role. The second is most problematic, since it causes staff confusion. But the missing role also occurs
 because projects have inexperienced managers. This is a big
 problem...around System Engineering roles, or lack thereof.”