 HALLWAY CHATTER *
 One day a friend came into my office, depressed about her project. She was
 in a test group, and their group was essentially shut off from the rest of the
 project. They didn’t get timely information about what was happening; they
 didn’t hear the latest project gossip. The only people they could talk to were
 each other. Following the anthropologist Bateson, we call this condition
 “schismogenesis”—the creation of schisms. Her situation was the most
 striking example I had ever seen. She went on to other projects, so I didn’t find
 out what ever happened with the organization. I suspect the problem wasn’t
 fixed until the project was reorganized, or until a quality crisis forced them to
 involve the testers better. 
...the organization has been established, and people have settled
 into their roles. This has led to uneven communication among the
 team members, and some members do not feel a part of the team. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
If people are left out of the main communication flow, they
 become dissatisfied, gripe among themselves, and may even leave
 the project. And by the way, they can’t do their jobs as well. 
When people become disengaged from communication networks,
 they can feel alienated from the community. They sometimes commiserate with others in the same situation, forming alliances with others
 who are equally distant from the center of the community. This phe
 nomenon was first observed by Bateson in the Sepik tribes in New
 Guinea, and was named “schmismogenesis.” [Bateson1958] 
The following interaction grid (see SOCIAL NETWORK THEORY FOUNDATIONS (7.5.2)) shows an organization exhibiting schismogenesis. One
 can see interactions along, but not on, the diagonal. These are best
 explained as “comfort groups” that differentiate themselves according
 to their shared centrality (or relative lack thereof) with respect to the
 organizational structure. See THE OPEN CLOSED PRINCIPLE OF TEAMS
 (6.1.4) for more on schismogenesis. 
For any given role, there is a certain amount of information which is
 formally required for that role to be fulfilled. But this is usually insufficient for optimal efficiency; we tend to do better when we have contextual information as well as essential information. 
But the hard thing is knowing what that additional information is.
 It’s elusive: for example, a project might be officially on schedule, but
 the developers are murmuring among themselves that development
 isn’t going so well. There is nothing concrete to put one’s finger on, but
 something isn’t quite right. This is important information if you are
 the tester waiting for delivery. 
Therefore: 
Organizational Style Pattern Language
 271
 Move team members physically as close to each other as possible.
 Be sure that people with outer roles are located close to the central
 roles. 
Thomas Allen [Allen1977] gives guidelines for physical distance. 
Of course, some projects, for various reasons, are split geographically. This can lead to exactly this problem unless ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION (5.1.8) and CONWAY’S LAW (5.1.7) are followed. 
Note that it is a misapplication of this pattern to apply it to only a
 subset of an organization responsible for a project. If for example, one
 clusters all the developers together in a “developer’s ghetto”, and forgets System Test or Marketing, you violate ENGAGE QUALITY ASSURANCE
 (4.2.29) and ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6). And you actually create, rather
 than alleviate schismogenesis. In addition, communication with individuals outside the project is also important. Allen [Allen1977] points
 out that the high performers had significantly more communication
 outside the project than low performers. See THE WATER COOLER (5.1.20)
 for additional ways to encourage communication, particularly outside
 the project. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
 The pattern complements DIVIDE AND CONQUER (5.1.6) both by
 encouraging symmetries within local groups, and establishing pathways between groups. 
There are two complementary effects of this action. First, the people
 in the outer roles feel like they are a part of the project, and their
 morale improves. They are less likely to gripe about the project with
 other outsiders because they are no longer outsiders. The second thing
 that happens is that they pick up more technical information through
 informal means, such as the chatter in the hallways, and they can do
 their jobs better. This secondary effect is the generative nature of this
 pattern: As communication improves quality and time-to-market are
 improved, which tends to reduce the number of people needed for the
 project, which reduces communication overhead, which helps
 improve communication, and so on. 
An organization consists of both roles and the people who fill those
 roles. Both must be considered. While most of the patterns in this language address one or the other, this pattern is unusual in that it
 bridges the two. 
A PUBLIC CHARACTER (4.2.17) such as a MATRON ROLE (4.2.18) or GATE
 KEEPER (4.2.10) can be a catalyst for HALLWAY CHATTER.