ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS MARKET *
 Vegetable market, San Diego, California. 
....the market comprises several customers with similar but conflicting needs. The project has adopted sound architectural principles, and can organize its software according to market needs. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
There needs to be an identified role or organization with accountability to each market segment. 
For example, AT&T used to market both private branch exchanges
 (PBXs), which customers owned and administered on site, and a feature called CENTREX that ran on telephone company switches to offer
 PBX-like features to its customers. Different organizations marketed
 CENTREX and PBXs, which caused confusion about how best to serve
 the company’s markets. 
The development organization should track and meet the needs of
 each customer. Customer needs are similar, and much of what they all
 need can be done in common. Different customers expect results on
 different schedules. 
Therefore: 
In an organization designed to serve several distinct markets, it is
 important to reflect the market structure in the development organization. One frequently overlooked opportunity for a powerful pattern
 is the conscious design of a “core” organization, that supports only
 what is common across all market segments. Ralph Johnson calls this a
 framework team. It is important to put this organization in place up
 front. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Note that since CONWAY’S LAW (5.1.7) states that organization and
 architecture are isomorphic, that the architecture must follow the
 market. In reality, if the organization is set up to follow the market, it
 makes it easier to have a clean architecture that follows the market
 lines. The success of this pattern is necessary to the success of ARCHI
TECT ALSO IMPLEMENTS (5.2.10), since the architect’s focus and intent are
 driven much by the market. ARCHITECT ALSO IMPLEMENTS (5.2.10) should
 be seen as an audit, refinement, or fine-tuning of this pattern. 
Once taken care of, this pattern allows the organization to start
 forming around patterns like FORM FOLLOWS FUNCTION (5.1.11) to flesh
 out the structure at a finer level. 
AT&T actually solved this problem in an extreme way—by spinning off its PBX organization as a separate company. 
Most of the rationale is in the forces. Two of the major forces relate
 to individual customer schedules, and to posture the organization to
 respond quickly to customer requests. Two important aspects of
 domain analysis are broadening the architecture (e.g., by working at
 the base class level), and ensuring that architectural evolution tracks
 the vendor understanding of customer needs. A single organization
 can’t faithfully track multiple customer needs, and this organization
 allows different arms of the organization to track different markets
 independently.