 PRODUCERS IN THE MIDDLE **
 The chef, the producer of food, is often the center of attention. 
...one of the first steps a project takes in self-understanding is the
 identification of roles, and in particular, which roles are the PRODUCER ROLES (5.1.3). But it is the information flow among the roles that helps
 get the work done. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
In a project, not all roles hear everything. But much of the information communicated has important implications for the product. 
Within any software project, there are many activities, roles, and
 individuals competing for attention. Of course, there are the developers. But project managers have a need to be at the center of everything. They need to have their finger on the pulse of the project; to
 know everything that is going on. That’s their job. In a similar manner,
 perhaps to a lesser degree, other roles also need to be involved in the
 project. 
But all roles are not equal. Certain roles (developer and a few
 others) contribute directly to the product; they create it. Most other
 roles contribute indirectly to the product; they (should) exist only to
 help the producers do their job. The producer roles need information
 in order to do their job. 
Therefore, 
 The producer role(s) must be at the center or very near the center
 of the hive of communication. Make sure the producers are party to
 all, or nearly all communication about the project. 
The role at the center of the project must be a producer role (in fact,
 it should be the producer role that gets the most done — like developer.) Consider the developer roles at the center of this healthy organization, an organization that develops financial trading software on
 tight schedules: 
The role at the center shows the focus of the project. In most cases, it
 is a role like Developer or Coder. In a few cases, the most central role is
 a management role (we have seen this, but rarely.) In this case, the
 focus of the project is not on developing the product, but rather it is on
 managing the development of the product. 
If you find that your most central role is not a producer, you need
 to, as a project, sit down and do some soul searching. Why isn’t your
 focus on the product, like it should be? What is getting in the way? For
 example, are you so preoccupied with something like ISO 9001 certification that you have lost your focus? 
Note that this can be taken to an extreme. If you have too many
 roles, and they all focus on the Coder, for example, (see picture), the
 coder will have so much communication that they can’t get anything
 done. So this must be applied together with FEW ROLES (5.1.2). See also
 DISTRIBUTE WORK EVENLY (5.1.13). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
 The natural tendency when this pattern is applied is toward WORK
 FLOWS INWARD (4.1.18) — the developers will tend to get the information they need. This is not always true, as it can get sidetracked by
 managers who are overly meddlesome. However, left alone, developers will evolve naturally to this pattern, and then to WORK FLOWS INWARD. 
This pattern is closely related to DEVELOPER CONTROLS PROCESS
 (4.1.17). If the developer — a producer role — controls the process, he
 or she is likely to be a hub of communication. In fact, allowing the
 developer to control the process is one way to help make this pattern
 happen.