 SHAPING CIRCULATION REALMS *
 Square dancing — overt shaping of circulation realms. 
...in the application of communication patterns, you need to
 reshape the social network of the organization to move roles closer or
 further to the center, or closer or further from the customer, or to balance load, or to otherwise support some pattern of communication
 structure in the organization. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
One cannot just expect communications to happen spontaneously; more so, one cannot expect any particular configuration of
 communication to arise in an arbitrary social environment. 
Proper communication structures between roles are key to organizational success. Communication can’t be controlled from a single
 role; at least two roles must be involved. Communication patterns
 can’t be dictated; some second-order force must be present to
 encourage them. Communication follows semantic coupling between
 responsibilities. 
Therefore: 
Create structures in the organization or in the work space that
 encourage the communication connections that support other patterns. 
Give people titles that creates a hierarchy or pecking order whose
 structure reflects the desired taxonomy. Give people job responsibili
 ties that suggest the appropriate interactions between roles (see also
 MOVE RESPONSIBILITIES (5.1.18)). 
Physically collocate people whom you wish to have close communication coupling (this is the dual of the pattern ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION (5.1.8)). 
Tell people what to do and with whom they should interact; people
 will usually try to respect your wishes if you ask them to do something
 reasonable that is within their purview and power. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
This pattern is a building block for other patterns in the language,
 including ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS MARKET (5.1.9), DEVELOPER CONTROLS
 PROCESS (4.1.17), DECOUPLE STAGES (5.1.16), ARCHITECT ALSO IMPLEMENTS
 (5.2.10), ENGAGE QUALITY ASSURANCE (4.2.29), ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6),
 RESPONSIBILITIES ENGAGE (5.1.14), THE WATER COOLER (5.1.20), HALLWAY
 CHATTER (5.1.15), SUBSYSTEM BY SKILL (4.2.23), and others. This pattern
 may also apply to circulation realms outside the project through patterns like FIRE WALLS (4.2.9), and many others. The goal is to produce
 an organization with higher overall cohesion, with sub-parts that are
 as internally cohesive and externally de-coupled as possible. 
This follows an Alexandrian pattern ([Alexander1977], ff. 480) of the
 same name, and has strong analogies to the rationales of “House
 Cluster” ([Alexander1977], ff. 197). An analogous rationale for organizational structures can be found in [Allen1977]. In fact, the organizational structure may be homomorphic with the structure of the
 buildings and rooms in which the organization lives and works, so
 Alexander’s pattern of the same name may be a crucial driving force
 behind this ostensibly organizational concern. 
Note that MOVE RESPONSIBILITIES (5.1.18) is a closely related pattern. 
See related notes in the Rationale for GATE KEEPER (4.2.10).