STABLE ROLES *
 No, not THAT kind of stable! 
In our organization studies, we ask teams to simulate their typical development experience. During one such exercise, the team described a quality
 crisis, and how they formed a task force to handle the problem. I was struck
 that the team seemed to thrive on crisis; crisis management was valued and
 rewarded. When I mentioned this during the debriefing, the architect said,
 “Yes, we run on crises like a car runs on gasoline.” 
... a team has been formed, and the PRODUCER ROLES (5.1.3) are in
 place. During the course of development, disruptions and distractions
 are common. The team’s response to them can have long-term impact
 on the health of the organization. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
If a team overreacts to disruptions, the team can become perpetually dysfunctional. 
A well-functioning team is like a spring, stretched over some distance. A disruption is like a wave induced in the spring; it travels
 along the spring for a while, keeping things from working as they did
 before. The right response damps the wave and life returns to normal.
 But the wrong response tends to amplify the wave and keep it going.
 In organizations, the danger is twofold: first, that the disruption inter
 rupts the team more than it should, and second that the team members
 begin to see the disruption response as the normal way of life. 
Disruptions to teams come in many flavors. The most obvious ones
 are crises such as emergency bug fixes. But team growth, changes in
 requirements, reorganizations are also disruptions. 
Each disruption requires action which takes attention away from
 the task at hand. So the challenge is to take the appropriate action
 while minimizing the attention it draws away from the main job. An
 important aspect of this challenge is rewards: dealing with disruptions, particularly crises, deserves rewards, but one must be careful
 not to value fire fighting over fire prevention. People have been known
 to commit software development arson in order to become software fire fighting heroes. 
Therefore, 
Whenever possible, keep people in roles for at least the duration
 of the project release. Avoid elevating transient tasks dealing with
 disruptions to the status of roles. 
Obviously, in order for this to work, the roles themselves must be
 around for the duration of the project. 
The key is that as a disruption comes up, don’t create a new role to
 handle it. Handling disruptions, particularly crises, has a certain status
 to it. If you allow a role to emerge, then the role institutionalizes the
 behavior, which tends to encourage the disruptions to happen. So
 instead, focus on nurturing the PRODUCER ROLES (5.1.3). This can be
 done carefully in the rewards (see COMPENSATE SUCCESS (4.2.25).) 
Beyond typical crises, this pattern can be used as the team composition changes. Such disruptions may be less dramatic, but often are
 more devastating. Even team growth can cause serious disruption. So
 as the team changes, keep the remaining people in the same roles as
 much as possible. Instead, try to keep the role changes to the natural
 breaks in the project, such as just after the project ships. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The impact of this action is manyfold. If you keep people in the
 same roles, the learning curve is obviously flattened. It helps maintain
 DOMAIN EXPERTISE IN ROLES (4.2.22). If people’s roles don’t change when
 they must deal with a crisis, they still retain their primary focus. Fur
 thermore, the organization keeps its values focused on the long-term
 solutions, and not on the short-term disruptions. 
This may seem like simple common sense, and it is. But the trouble
 with common sense is that it is, well, so uncommon.