COMPLETION HEADROOM **
 Speaking of headroom... 
...work is progressing as the software unfolds and the team learns
 more about the system from the customer and from the behavior of the
 system itself. Things are far enough along to start thinking about
 delivery, and about delivering what can be delivered to the customer
 on the agreed delivery date. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Every project must commit to delivery on a few hard and fast
 dates. This is actually fortunate because it is about the only way to get
 out of work that is going poorly. It’s also important because it’s usually
 more important to deliver something on a specified date even than to
 deliver everything that was anticipated: when is often more important
 than what. A WORK SPLIT (4.1.11) provides the graceful exit by allowing
 one to defer the portion of work that is not understood or going poorly
 while saving the part that does work or will save face. A WORK SPLIT
 does require some advance notice since some portion of the work must
 still be completed before deadline. 
Therefore:  
 Project work group completion dates from remaining effort estimates in the WORK QUEUE REPORT [Cunningham1996]. Take the largest
 of the earliest completion dates for each work group and compare it to
 any hard delivery date that may apply. The difference is your COMPLETION HEADROOM. 
Any group has an obligation to make their efforts visible through
 what becomes the ultimate trouble signal, low COMPLETION HEADROOM
 (4.1.10). Headroom disappears when developmental activities fail to
 match those of COMPARABLE WORK [Cunningham1996]. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
In order for COMPLETION HEADROOM to work, it is vital to calculate it
 from the beginning, and recalculate it often, at least weekly. Watch for
 trends. Headroom will often jitter plus or minus a day or two from
 week to week. But steady evaporation of headroom for any WORK
 GROUP is a sure indicator for management attention. You have at your
 disposal reordering the WORK QUEUE (4.1.13), possibly deferring whole
 items to later release, the WORK SPLIT already mentioned, or the public
 embarrassment of a RECOMMITMENT MEETING (4.1.12). 
A common problem is the well-meaning escalation of requirements
 by people too close to a problem. If you track COMPLETION HEADROOM
 (4.1.10), you are better in a position to assess the impact of adding
 these requirements to the project. 
See also TAKE NO SMALL SLIPS (4.1.9). 
A version of this pattern first appeared in [Cunningham1996].