DAY CARE *
 Alias: “Progress Team / Training Team” 
... the project has just brought on several new people. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Your experts are spending all their time mentoring novices. 
You begin to hear things like “We are wasting our experts,” or “A
 few experts could do the whole project faster.” Indeed, the experts are
 not proceeding at the rate you or they would expect, because training
 the new people is draining their energy, time and concentration. But
 the new people must be trained, by experts, of course. 
At the same time, you must make progress on the project itself. 
Therefore: 
Put one expert in charge of all the novices, let the others develop
 the system. 
Separate an experts-only “progress” team from a training team
 under the tutelage of one or more mentors. Select the mentors for their
 ability to teach design and programming (object-oriented design and
 programming, for example) to novices. Let the progress team design
 85-95% of the system, let the training team focus on quality training,
 delivering only 5-15% part of the system. Transfer people to the
 progress team as they become able to contribute meaningfully. 
Make sure that the training team does not simply do training exercises, but actually contributes to the final system in an ever-increasing
 way. 
If you have many people to train (more than, say, six), you will have
 to design a series of tasks for them to attempt. Otherwise you may give
 them a small, real part of the main system to design. 
If the people in the training team are the ones who know the
 domain, you will have to make some further adjustment, or else the
 division may cause conflict. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The result is that most of the experts can continue to make progress
 on the project. The novices contribute a small part of the project, that
 grows as they gain experience. 
In extreme cases, though, you eventually have too few people to
 constitute a progress team. 
How many people can one mentor train, if training results and not
 running software are his/her deliverable? A small, reasonable number
 is five. I have heard of one person mentoring 15 people on five concurrent mini-projects. 
Related patterns: 
This pattern is a cross-specialization of several given in this 
chapter: OWNER PER DELIVERABLE (10.5.19), SOMEONE ALWAYS MAKES PROGRESS (4.1.20), TEAM PER TASK (4.1.21), SACRIFICE ONE PERSON (4.1.22). 
Principles involved: 
The principles are synergy vs. distraction, the synergy of having a novice learn directly from an expert vs. the distraction 
to the expert. Experts having to answer novice questions are reduced to a fraction of their productivity, without particularly raising the productivity of the newcomers. Adding one 
novice to an expert may cut the expert’s productivity in half, 
adding two may cut it to a third, adding three may prevent 
all productivity altogether. 
 Assume there are X experts who work at productivity 1 each, 
a larger number of N novices who work at n productivity 
each, with n much smaller than 1, on the order of 1/10. If the 
experts could work together, they would have, in this simple 
model, a total productivity of 
(X) for the experts working together. 
If one of them is sacrificed to train the novices, that person 
has zero productivity (except training novices), so the 
group’s total productivity is 
(X-1) + N*n for Day Care (upper curve in figure 8.1). 
If they are all mixed together (“Even Mix”), m=N/X novices 
per expert, each expert’s productivity falls from 1 to some
thing like 1/(m+1). The group’s total productivity is now 
(X*X/ (N+1)) + N*n for Even Mix (lower curve in figure 8.1). 
Figure 8.1 shows the productivity of DAY CARE (4.1.23) versus 
EVEN MIX, novices assumed to work at 1/10th the productiv
ity of the experts. This shows the total productivity for the 
team in units of experienced people’s productivity. As the 
number of novices increases, the EVEN MIX line shows the 
effect of training them. Let us check that the assumed produc
tivity difference is not skewing the results. Figure 8.2 shows 
the ratio of DAY CARE (4.1.23) to EVEN MIX, for different pro
ductivity assumptions. Note that with five experts and five 
novices, the ratio is actually just below one, meaning that the 
 experts are absorbing and making use of the novices. By two 
novices per expert, DAY CARE (4.1.23) is already considerably 
more effective. 
The nature of the training does not matter. Design and teaching are antagonistic tasks (as described in TEAM PER TASK 
(4.1.21)), and better split into separate teams. 
Treating the delivery of trained people as separate from the delivery
 of running software gives you access to OWNER PER DELIVERABLE
 (10.5.19). SOMEONE ALWAYS MAKES PROGRESS (4.1.20) protects the delivery
 of running software. 
Sample situations: 
A. Mentoring. The standard recommendation in the industry is to
 put 1-5 novices under each trained expert. The consequence is that the
 experts spend the prime part of their energies training, halfheartedly.
 Besides being drained of energy for designing the system, the experts
 typically do not have the personality, background or inclination to
 actually teach the novices how to do design. They are caught between
 trying to get the maximum out of their trainees and trying to do the
 maximum development themselves. Thus, they neither develop the
 system, nor train the novices adequately. 
Some companies have dedicated “Apprenticeship” programs, in
 which novices are put under the tutelage of a dedicated mentor for 2
 weeks out of every 3 for 6 months. 
B. Adding staff. Fred Brooks, in The Mythical Man-Month, talks
 about the training costs of adding people to a project. These new
 people drain productivity from the experts. The same suggestion
 applies: put the newcomers in a separate team to learn the system.
 Move them to the progress team as soon as they are up to speed. 
 Reading: 
Brooks, F., The Mythical Man-Month, Addison-Wesley, 1995
 [Brooks1995]. 
In Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation, [Lave1991],
 Lave and Wenger describe the use of this sort of arrangement in
 apprentice-based work situations. 
A version of this pattern first appeared in [Cockburn1998].