 GET ON WITH IT **
 Alias: PARTIAL EVALUATION 
Get ready... 
Go!!!!! 
During one study, I asked the organization to describe how they develop
 software. “Well,” they said, “project management gives us a list of features
 they want estimates for. So we start working on the features we think are the
 most important. Over time, they ask for more detailed estimates, and the features we are working on have smaller estimates, because they are underway.
 Those features generally make the cut. By the time we get official approval to
 begin development, we are nearly finished.” 
 ....you have a good idea of a market need and, furthermore, a good
 idea of how to get started on parts of the project. You’re eager to get
 started but want to proceed deliberately and by the path that will be
 both expedient and productive. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
You can’t wait until you have every last requirement to get
 started. 
Team members are sitting idle because their upstream tasks have
 not been completed. On the one hand, you want requirements to be
 done carefully. On the other hand, you have some information, and
 people sitting idle. 
Therefore: 
As soon as you have confidence about some project direction,
 start developing areas in which you have high confidence. These
 may lie in the area of hardware development (or procurement), algorithm development, database schema development, etc. Let each subgroup work according to an INFORMAL LABOR PLAN (4.1.14) as if they
 were in full-swing development. 
Note that “high confidence” refers to project direction and requirements, not technology. It’s perfectly all right, and in fact desirable, to
 work on the technologically risky areas first (see BUILD PROTOTYPES
 (4.1.7).) 
Give yourself some room to retrench later as requirements become
 more clear. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
In many projects, behavioral requirements are one of the last things
 that the designers get right. Many projects ship their first release with
 only basic requirements met, with economically more significant
 requirements met in subsequent releases. Telecommunications systems often follow this pattern, offering basic communications systems
 in early releases and more advanced features later. In fact, behavioral
 requirements are often overrated in their impact on the overall structure of the system; the code that meets behavioral requirements often
 lives in application code that is added very late to a robust stable base.
 The base reflects deep domain knowledge more than it reflects behavioral requirements. There is much common code that can be done early
 on with high confidence: code that supports common domain functionality that is part of most systems for a given market. This code can
 often be started or acquired before requirements are firm. 
This pattern can increase rework, but it is more in the spirit of piecemeal growth architecture than would be a master-planned system that
 precipitates from “complete” requirements. It is likely that any false
 starts will also be educational at the enterprise level. In fact, as a risk
 management measure one can consciously decide to not commit to the
 results of such an activity. On the enterprise level, this becomes the
 pattern SKUNK WORKS (4.2.14); with a project, it is BUILD PROTOTYPES
 (4.1.7). 
There are two occasions in which you cannot tolerate that rework.
 First, if the task is the process bottleneck, it must work at peak efficiency, and rework should be minimized. Very occasionally, the
 rework will take longer than the original task, and so this pattern
 should not be used. 
Teams need good communication with their upstream counterparts
 through patterns like HALLWAY CHATTER (5.1.15) and RESPONSIBILITIES ENGAGE (5.1.14) to make this work. 
The principle involved is that a process not constraining the overall
 system can afford to be done inefficiently and in parallel. It is often the
 case that the analysts, designers and programmers can get started
 right away, without having finalized requirements. Serializing their
 work will take longer than doing 10-20% rework. In one group we
 studied, the database group constrained the process. They could not
 afford rework, and had to work in the most efficient way possible.
 Therefore, they did not start early, but waited until their requirements
 were stable. The designer/programmers had enough extra time that
 they could afford to prototype some test databases for themselves,
 which were thrown away when the database designers did their final
 design. 
Examples: 
Each team had 1 requirements & analysis person, and 2-3 designer/
 programmers. Database design was understaffed and constraining the
 process, so it was made a special service group given final requirements only (the counterforce). A first cut at the requirements had been
 done earlier, so a rough set of requirements were available. Much of
 the system was similar. 
The designer/programmers quickly got ahead of the requirements
 people, who were busy in meetings trying to nail down details of the
 requirements. If they waited until the requirements were solid, they
 would not have enough time for to do their work. They were able to
 guess quite closely what the requirements would be like, without
 knowing final details, so they started design and programming right
 away. The requirements person gave them course corrections after
 each meeting. The amount of time it took to incorporate those midcourse alterations was small compared to the total design time. 
This pattern comes from Alistair Cockburn’s original pattern ALL
 AT ONCE (10.5.3) [Cockburn1996], which was later modified and
 renamed GOLD RUSH [Cockburn1998]. The alias name “PARTIAL EVALUATION” comes from the inspiration that this is a temporal form of DIVIDE
 AND CONQUER (5.1.6). The name “GET ON WITH IT (4.1.3)” arose when
 we discovered that the name the pattern bore at that time—JUST DO IT-CONFLICTED with another pattern written by Jeff Garland. Jeff suggested
 the current name. 
Shalom Reich writes: 
 The “ALL AT ONCE (10.5.3)” pattern appears to be a typical 
Project Management “crash project” approach. In a “crash 
project” one must be careful to identify true predecessors for 
each task with the goal of reducing the “critical path”. This 
allows parallel efforts to proceed which will all “come 
together” at the last possible moment. I have found that 
project plans often contain false linkages between tasks. For 
example, in one large project we had a “specification” phase. 
I was able to break the project into several smaller projects 
which each had its own specification phase. This allowed me 
to juggle my limited resources and have coders working on 
the part that went first through the specification phase at the 
same time that the analysts were working on the specifications for the second sub-project. 