INCREMENTAL INTEGRATION **
 Contribute to software one piece at a time, gradually, avoiding waterfall and 
other precipitous changes. 
...some organizations have infrequent integrations which reflect
 large changes. This can make it difficult for the integration release to
 work as expected, complicate the process of work integration and
 make NAMED STABLE BASES (4.1.4) difficult to achieve when modules do
 not work together. Because we often develop with one OWNER PER
 DELIVERABLE (10.5.19) there will be occasional mismatches between
 units. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
 For iterative development to work well, it is necessary to make
 sure that components work together. 
Subsystems get developed at different rates. Developers work in a
 PRIVATE WORLD (4.1.6). We need to find a way to make it possible to
 integrate without surprises. 
Therefore: 
Provide a mechanism to allow developers to build all the current
 software periodically. Developers should be discouraged from
 maintaining long intervals between check-ins. Developers should
 also be able to build against any of the NAMED STABLE BASES (4.1.4), or
 the newest checked in software, at will. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Assign the task of building the entire software system periodically:
 NAMED STABLE BASES (4.1.4) suggests intervals no more frequent than a
 week. This periodic build should be checked for interface compatibility (does it compile?) and testing (does it still work?) 
Encourage developers to build from files that are likely to be in the
 release (for example, perhaps the newest code in the revision control
 system is trunk) to anticipate, and allow time to correct for, incompatibilities. The goal is to avoid a “big bang” integration and allow the
 developmental build to proceed smoothly. 
This can be combined with PRIVATE WORLD to ensure that the
 changes integrate with a copy of the current development system.
 There are issues relating to the size of the software system (some systems take quite a while to build, making frequent integrations difficult). Balance this with PRIVATE VERSIONING (5.2.16) to allow the
 developer some leeway on deciding when to integrate their new code
 into their environment, but do not put it off for too long. 
Example: 
The developer’s work space could be updated (at the developer’s
 request) to a named stable base from the project repository approximately weekly. The developer will also retrieve the current files from
 the repository to anticipate how the current changes in the work space
 will work with files that may later be in the baseline. 
