INFORMAL LABOR PLAN **
 Constructing an adobe building, Penasco, New Mexico. Workers using an 
informal labor plan. 
We were discussing the introduction of new project management software.
 One project manager protested that it was too high level; it didn’t provide the
 granularity she needed. It turned out that she wanted to track items that were
 fractions of days of effort. 
... real development requires developers to work on several parallel
 tasks such as DEVELOPMENT EPISODES (4.1.15) that may have interdependent or even conflicting priorities and due dates. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
A schedule of developer work tasks can both assist workers in
 planning their time, and ensure stakeholders about scheduling
 expectations. The DEVELOPMENT EPISODE presents an ideal that must be
 worked into the lives of people trying to get a big job done quickly.
 Developers will often find themselves obligated to more than one in progress DEVELOPMENT EPISODE at a time. The WORK QUEUE (4.1.13) offers
 one prioritizing, though one that ignores the many small trade-offs
 possible when the work is at hand. 
Therefore: 
Let individuals devise their own short-term plans. Accept that
 much of the group activity implied in a DEVELOPMENT EPISODE will take
 place pair-wise between group members that find the time to tackle
 some issue together (DEVELOPING IN PAIRS (4.2.28)). Avoid the temptation to call a meeting where a developmental climax is intended to
 happen. It won’t. Instead let individuals express interests and make
 commitments to each other. And let them revise these intentions on a
 moment’s notice when the energy of some episode reaches an irresistible level. 
Note that this means that there is a threshold of detail below which
 a project manager should not track. The threshold may vary
 depending on the project, but it is a safe bet that tasks smaller than a
 few days should not be formally tracked. One might get a sense of
 excess detail by the amount of complaining the developers do about
 the relevance of the tracking. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
This leads to an organization where the DEVELOPER CONTROLS PROCESS
 (4.1.17). Not only does the developer suggest the overall structure of
 commitments, but the developer becomes the focal point for day-to-day priority calls. 
A DEVELOPMENT EPISODE is actually composed of a series of PROGRAMMING EPISODES (4.1.19), some of which must take place in (at least) pairs
 if any approximation of group consciousness is to form. An individual’s labor plan is his tool to make these connections happen. Pair
 Programming Facilities [Beck1999] are configurations of the physical
 environment that can reduce this planning to an occasional HALLWAY CHATTER (5.1.15) promise. 
A version of this pattern first appeared as [Cunningham1996].