 MERCENARY ANALYST *
 On one of his many journeys in the Appalachian Mountains, the itinerant
 folk song collector John Jacob Niles heard a woman singing a particularly
 beautiful song. He persuaded her to repeat the now-famous Christmas song,
 “I Wonder as I Wander,” until he had learned it himself. He later said, “I
 never saw her again.” 
... you are assembling the roles for the organization. The organization exists in a context where external reviewers, customers, and
 internal developers expect to use project documentation to understand
 the system architecture and its internal workings. (User documentation is considered separately). Supporting a design notation, and the
 related project documentation, is too tedious a job for people directly
 contributing to product artifacts. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Technical documentation is the dirty work every project must do.
 It’s important to create—and, more so, to maintain—good documentation for subsequent use by the project itself. Who writes these documents? 
If developers do their own documentation, it hampers “real” work.
 Meeting software deadlines means money to the organization; tech
 nical documentation is one of those things we tell ourself can be
 deferred until there is time to do it. But “the time to do it” often never
 comes, and an organization without good internal technical documentation of its system has a serious handicap. 
Documentation is often write-only. 
Engineers often don’t have good communication skills. 
Many projects use tools like Rose to do design, that produce pretty
 pictures. A good picture is not necessarily a good design, and architects can become victims of the elegance of their own drawings (see
 the rationale below). 
Therefore: 
Hire a technical writer, proficient in the necessary domains, but
 without a stake in the design itself. 
This person will capture the design using a suitable notation, and
 will format and publish the design for reviews and for consumption
 by the organization itself. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The documentation itself should be maintained on-line where ever
 possible. It must be kept up-to-date (therefore, MERCENARY ANALYST is a
 full-time job), and should relate to customer scenarios (SCENARIOS
 DEFINE PROBLEM (4.2.8)). Note, though, that all team members need to
 provide input to keep the documentation up to date. The AD- HOC
 CORRECTIONS (10.5.2) pattern [Weir1998] suggests that a master copy of
 the documentation be kept, and that team members write corrections
 in the margin. One team member is assigned to periodically update
 the document. 
The success of this pattern depends on finding a suitably skilled
 agent to fill the role of mercenary analyst. If the pattern succeeds, the
 new context defines a project whose progress can be reviewed (the pattern STAND UP MEETING (5.2.7)) and monitored by community experts
 outside the project. 
If the MERCENARY ANALYST really is a “mercenary” who “rides into
 town, gets the early stuff documented, kisses his horse, saddles up his
 girl, and rides off into the sunset” (Paul Chisholm), then it’s good to
 keep some of the expertise behind by combining MERCENARY ANALYST
 with DEVELOPING IN PAIRS (4.2.28). 
 This pattern is uncommon but empirically grounded and effective,
 found in Borland’s Quattro Pro for Windows and many AT&T projects
 (a joint venture based in New Jersey, a formative organization in
 switching support, and others). It is difficult to find people with the
 skills to fill this role. 
Rybczynski writes: 
Here is another liability: beautiful drawings can become ends 
in themselves. Often, if the drawing deceives, it is not only 
the viewer who is enchanted but also the maker, who is the 
victim of his own artifice. Alberti understood this danger and 
pointed out that architects should not try to imitate painters 
and produce lifelike drawings. The purpose of architectural 
drawings, according to him, was merely to illustrate the relationship of the various parts... Alberti understood, as many 
architects of today do not, that the rules of drawing and the 
rules of building are not one and the same, and mastery of 
the former does not ensure success in the latter. — 
[Rybczynski1989, p. 121]. 
A passage from Manzoni’s I Promessi Sposi (The Betrothed
 [Manzoni1984]) might amuse the MERCENARY ANALYST. 
The peasant who knows not how to write, and who needs to 
write, applies to one who knows that art, choosing as far as 
he can one of his own station, for with others he is hesitant, or 
a little untrusting. He informs him, with more or less clarity 
and orderliness, of who his ancestors were, and in the same 
manner tells him what to set down on paper. The literate person understands part and guesses at the rest, gives a few 
pieces of advice, suggests a few changes, and says “Leave it 
to me.” 
He picks up his pen, puts the other’s thoughts as well as he 
can in literary form, corrects them, improves them, embellishes them, tones them down, or even omits them, according 
to how he thinks best, because—and there’s nothing to be 
done about it—someone who knows better than others has 
no wish to be a mere tool in their hands, and when he is concerned with the business of others he wants it to go a little in 
his own way. 
 Richard Gabriel [Gabriel1995] notes the following are important
 traits of this role: 
• good meeting facilitator 
• likes things organized 
• good attention to details 
• has written instructional material (for software) 
• has no ego to invest in the material being documented 
• very smart, highly educated (Ph.D. in literature from Cornell in
 my case) 
In exceptional cases, the MERCENARY ANALYST can actually take a
 stake in the design. Betsy Hanes Perry writes: 
When I fill this role, I most definitely have a stake in the 
design: I want to make sure it’s elegant, consistent, and clean. 
The architect has primary responsibility, of course, but I also 
suggest places in which the design conflicts with itself or may 
lead to future misunderstandings. As I see it, a software 
architecture is an idea. The designer/implementors are 
responsible for expressing that idea (or those ideas) as code; I 
express it/them as prose. Both are projections of the idea into 
a particular plane. When there’s a conflict, the code is probably correct. 
Many projects put faith in tools and notations such as UML to
 improve quality. But, as Betsy points out, the tool largely provides the
 forum and opportunity for a human being to engage in the processes  
 and convey the insights that contribute to quality. For documentation
 to have added value as a quality tool, the documentation process must
 proceed in the spirit of this admonition. 
Paul Chisholm offers the following about the history and rationale
 of MERCENARY ANALYST: 
 MERCENARY ANALYST came from two sources: 
(1) Borland’s Quattro Pro for Windows, which Cope’s identified as the most productive software development 
organization he’s ever seen (average 1000 delivered non-commentary 
source lines of C++ per staff week), in large part due to the 
 fact that developers had people to write the development 
documentation for them. 
Designer/coders have responsibilities that cannot be delegated. Some responsibilities, such as documentation, can be 
delegated. Besides, many excellent programmers and most 
average ones are less than stellar writers. Richard [Gabriel] 
may disagree that this *is* the case, and will certainly disagree that this *should* be the case... 
(2) A combination of two patterns. One, from Tony Hansen’s 
group, is DISPOSABLE ANALYSIS: do analysis once, translate to 
design, throw away the analysis, keep only the design up to 
date with the code. The other is my observation that most 
CASE tools require significant experience in the method and 
the tool itself. If you have DISPOSABLE ANALYSIS (which few 
projects plan to do but many follow unintentionally), you 
should not develop local expertise in CASE tool operation. 
It’s bad enough learning Framemaker. CASE tools tend to 
have lousy user interfaces; it’s a real pain to use them, or 
learn how to use them. 
The “mercenary” in MERCENARY ANALYST. comes from the 
“hired gun” quality a MERCENARY ANALYST might have; rides 
into town, gets the early stuff documented, kisses his horse, 
saddles up his girl, and rides off into the sunset. That’s the 
DISPOSABLE ANALYSIS model, not the Borland Quattro Pro for 
Windows model! 
Mercenary Analyst plays well with DEVELOPING IN PAIRS 
(4.2.28). 
Someone quoted by Jim Coplien wrote that “Mercenary Analyst is the professional technical writer who takes care of all 
the project diagrams and documentation so it doesn’t get in 
the way of the architects.” 
Maybe not a “tech writer”, and not " all the diagrams and 
documentation," but, yes, that’s the idea. 
 What should be a MERCENARY ANALYST’s education? Mastery of 
his or her tools (e.g., word processor, CASE tool) beyond that 
of most users. Experience (perhaps expertise) in the 
“method” behind the documentation (e.g., an ObjecTime 
MERCENARY ANALYST would have to know ROOM well, some
one writing requirements would need systems engineering 
and/or software development experience). 
What is the MERCENARY ANALYST’s motivation? To get the software 
(not the documentation) out faster! 
How can one paint CASE diagrams without knowledge of soft
ware? I had some naive hope that a CASE tool MERCENARY 
ANALYST could be a highly skilled clerk. I’ve given up on that. 
There may be some way of combining MERCENARY ANALYST 
with DEVELOPING IN PAIRS (4.2.28) (or a variant for triples) to 
make MERCENARY ANALYST some sort of entry-level or apprentice position. 
Domain Knowledge. While knowledge of the domain is impor
tant for a project (DOMAIN EXPERTISE IN ROLES (4.2.22)) I don’t 
think the MERCENARY ANALYST (4.1.24) needs it. (I hope not!) 
Knowledge of software is important. Would you trust a driving 
instruction manual written by someone who’d never driven?