 PRIVATE WORLD **
 ... an organization is creating NAMED STABLE BASES (4.1.4), and developers can build against these versions, integrating their own code with
 the latest of other code (INCREMENTAL INTEGRATION (4.1.5)). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
How can we balance the need for developers to use current revi      sions, based on periodic baselines, with the desire to avoid undue
 grief by having development dependencies change from underneath
 them? 
It is important for developers to work with current versions of software subsystems to keep up with the latest enhancements, avoid running into already fixed bugs fixed elsewhere, and to avoid getting out
 of synch with interface changes. 
Introducing new software into an environment while debugging
 may cause grief by introducing new behavior, and providing distractions because of the time spent resolving integration issues in some
 cases, code may no longer compile due to interface changes. 
However, we must balance these needs: the need to keep up to date
 with the need of developers to maintain a stable environment for feature development/bug fixing. 
 Some organizations, to facilitate INCREMENTAL INTEGRATION, will have
 a shared baseline of code, libraries, etc. Unfortunately changing a code
 base, even in a different subsystem, can cause problems when there are
 interface changes, for example. You want to avoid hearing stories
 about developers leaving a problem at night to view it in the morning    
 with a clear head, only to find that one’s test environment does not
 compile. 
Therefore: 
Provide a mechanism where developers can maintain a PRIVATE
 WORLD development environment. In their PRIVATE WORLD they can
 control the rate of integration. This allows them to avoid having an
 integration step interrupt work in progress. The environment
 should represent a snapshot of all the software being developed in a
 system, not just the code the developer is modifying. Try to ensure
 that the private development area is not used as a means of avoiding
 integration issues. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
A starting point for the independent development area would be
 one of the NAMED STABLE BASES which have been previously released.
 Developers then build their software and any related software that
 depends on their software. Alternatively, you can provide the ability to
 do a private system build from source code (and other artifacts). 
While allowing developers the freedom to decide when to allow
 changes into their space you need to make sure that the developers
 update their code as often as possible to avoid integration surprises. So
 encourage developers to integrate their code frequently, perhaps by
 providing a mechanism for easily backing out of a difficult change. 
Depending on details of implementation, one consequence of this
 pattern might be that project disk space requirements may grow
 quickly as N developers will have their own copies of the source code.
 But the costs of personnel almost always exceed the cost of an extra
 disk. A modification to this approach is that stable and distantly
 related subsystems can be used by reference, but one should be made
 aware of when changes are imminent. In this case the configuration
 management system should provide access to prior NAMED STABLE
 BASES as well. 
 Developers can simply defer advancing to a new instance of the
 NAMED STABLE BASES until the current problem is solved. 
A variation of a PRIVATE WORLD is a shared integration machine. In
 this case the developers move their new code to a system that has a
 current version of the system. 
The pattern simulates SOLO VIRTUOSO (4.2.5). See also PRIVATE VERSIONING (5.2.16). 
Example: 
A developer is working on a problem. The developer work space is
 self-contained with all of the files needed to build the system. The
 developer work space is updated only at the developer’s request, after
 the problem is solved in the context of the current NAMED STABLE BASES. 
Notes: 
Brad Appleton points out: 
Sun’s NSE (Network Software Environment) had this type of 
thing built into it. I think that the more recent TEAM WARE 
product may also have preserved some of these concepts. 
NSE let you create work spaces that it called “environments”. 
There were three kinds of environments you could create: 
• Independent Development Environments: for Independent Development. 
• Independent Integration Environments: for integrating
 (importing and merging) and reconciling changes and
 integration building and testing. 
• Independent Release Environments: for release builds,
 system test, and other release engineering and software
 product deployment activities. 
PRIVATE WORLD captures the spirit of all these environments. 
An environment would insulate developers but would not isolate
 them. There was an event notification and registration mechanism for
 broadcasting events in one or more other environments to interested
 parties (maybe this is a more general configuration management event
 notification pattern of which things like baseline publishing and
 change publishing are concrete variants).