SIZE THE SCHEDULE **
 Software engineers determining the next schedule. 
... the product is understood and the project size has been estimated. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Both overly ambitious schedules and overly generous schedules
 have their pains, either for the developers or the customers. 
If you make the schedule too generous, developers become complacent, and you miss market windows. But if the schedule is too ambitious, developers become burned out, and you miss market windows.
 And if the schedule is too ambitious, product quality suffers, and compromised architectural principles establish a poor foundation for
 future maintenance. 
Common wisdom says that you can trade off staff, schedule, and
 functionality. While principles such as Brooks’ “adding people to a late
 project makes it later” [Brooks1995] cast doubt on the place of staff in
 this equation, it’s clear that schedule and functionality trade off
 against each other. Ward Cunningham says in his pattern COMPARABLE WORK, “Every project must commit to delivery on a few hard and fast
 dates. This is actually fortunate because it is about the only way to get
 out of work that is going poorly.” [Cunningham1996] In a reasonable
 business climate, it is much smarter to hold the schedule constant and
 to negotiate functionality than it is to extend the schedule. The customer believes you can cut functionality, but a promise of having the
 yet unattained functionality at some future date leaves the customer
 much less comfortable. And projects without schedule motivation
 tend to go on forever, or spend too much time polishing details that
 are either irrelevant or don’t serve customer needs. 
Therefore: 
Reward developers for negotiating a schedule they prove to meet,
 with financial bonuses (or at-risk compensation; see COMPENSATE
 SUCCESS (4.2.25)), or with extra time off. Keep two sets of schedules:
 one for the market, and one for the developers. 
The external schedule is negotiated with the customer; the internal
 schedule, with development staff. The internal schedule should be
 shorter than the external schedule by two or three weeks for a moderate project (this figure comes from a senior staff member at a wellknown software consulting firm). If the two schedules can’t be reconciled, customer needs or the organization’s resources—or the schedule
 itself—must be re-negotiated (RECOMMITMENT MEETING (4.1.12)). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Help delineate the schedule with NAMED STABLE BASES (4.1.4). Grow
 as needed with PHASING IT IN (4.2.3). Define initial targets with WORK
 QUEUE (4.1.13). Make sure SOMEONE ALWAYS MAKES PROGRESS (4.1.20). 
The forces come from the MIT project management simulation and
 from studies as projects such as Borland Quattro Pro for Windows.
 Another manager suggested that the skew between the internal and
 external schedules be closer to two months than two weeks because, if
 you slip, it usually reflects a major oversight that costs two or three
 months. 
De Marco talks about rewarding people for accuracy of schedules;
 see [DeMarcoBoehm1986]. Verify this reference... Also, read about the
 place of promptness in [ZuckermanAndHatala1992]. 
You don’t need a full schedule—perhaps no schedule at all—to get
 started. See GET ON WITH IT (4.1.3) and BUILD PROTOTYPES (4.1.7).