WORK FLOWS INWARD **
 Work (i.e. pears) flowing into a pear processing plant. 
...an organization is in place and has been doing work long enough
 that it can introspect about its structure and workings. There is some
 management pecking order or hierarchical decision-making structure
 in the organizational network. Work instructions flow through this
 structure, with the possibility that each role makes decisions, adds
 constraints, or works to carry out decisions within some set of constraints. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
An organization must seek a structure that best insures that the
 most authoritative roles make the decisions and carry out the work
 that adds value directly to the product. 
Some centralized control and direction are necessary. During software production, the work bottleneck of a system should be at the
 center of its communication and control structure. If the communication center of the organization generates work more than it does work,
 then organization performance can become unpredictable and sporadic. The developer is already sensitized to market needs through
 FIRE WALLS (4.2.9) and GATE KEEPER (4.2.10) (no centralized role need fill
 this function). 
Look at the following grid that depicts the directed flow of communication in an organization (see HOW THE PATTERNS CAME TO US
 (CHAPTER 2)). In this organization, there is a core of roles at the center
 that initiate interactions across the spectrum of most of the other roles: 
Yet this core receives very little input from the rest of the roles in the
 organization. And this core is rife with management roles (Team
 Leader, Manager, Lead Assembler). It has an overloaded center, and
 work requests flow outward from this center, diffusing across the
 other roles. Core roles make work. 
Katz & Kahn’s analysis of organizations shows that the exercise of
 control is not a zero-sum game [KatzKahn1978, p. 314]. 
Therefore: 
Work should flow in to developer from stakeholders, especially
 customers. Work should not flow out from managers. 
You should not put managers at the center of the communication
 grid: they will become overloaded and make decisions that are less
 well-considered, and they will make decisions that don’t take day-to-day dynamics into account. 
Consider the following picture, where work flows from the roles
 across the organization to the roles at the center: Developer, Architect,
 Ambassador. There is a healthy distribution of inward-directed inputs.
 And in large part, the central roles do work, not make work. 
 ✥ ✥ ✥ 
The result is an organization whose communication grid has more
 points below the diagonal than above it (as in the second figure
 above). 
The work should focus at the center of the process; the center of the
 process should focus on value-added activities (DEVELOPER CONTROLS
 PROCESS (4.1.17)). 
But consider this interaction grid: 
 Superficially, the graph appears to show a WORK FLOWS INWARD pattern. But in fact, most of the interactions directed from outlying roles
 to the developer were of an imperative nature rather than an informative nature. The developer role was being pulled in many directions,
 and the organization health suffered greatly. 
Organizations run by professional managers tend to have repeatable business processes, but don’t seem to reach the same productivity
 plateaus of organizations run by engineers. In programmer-centric
 organizations, the value-added roles are at the center of the process
 (DEVELOPER CONTROLS PROCESS (4.1.17); ARCHITECT ALSO IMPLEMENTS
 (5.2.10)). The manager should facilitate and support these roles and
 their work (PATRON ROLE (4.2.15); FIRE WALLS (4.2.9)). 
Mackenzie characterizes this pattern using M-curves, that model the
 percentage of task processes of each task process law level (planning,
 directing, and execution) as a function of the classification.
 [Mackenzie1986] 
The rationale is supported with empirical observations from
 existing projects. 
The broad goal of this pattern is to separate overhead work from
 central work; DAY CARE (4.1.23) is another pattern with a similar intent. 
 The MANAGER ROLE should still make day-to-day decisions for the
 business process, and pursuant to their responsibility to “keep the
 pests away” (FIRE WALLS (4.2.9)). 
In his new work, The Nature of Order, Christopher Alexander speaks
 of gradients as one of the 15 structural properties of whole systems that
 emerge naturally in a process of local adaptation. In WORK FLOWS INWARD, there should be a natural gradient of information flow toward
 the developer: the “center” of the organization — both in the sense of
 the social network diagrams, and in the sense that Alexander uses the
 term “center” to describe a prominent feature of a system. 