HIERARCHY OF FACTORIES
 Alias: COMPOSITE FACTORY 
Making cheese in a small rural cheese factory. 
Cheeses in a larger cheese factory. 
...once we decide that the PARSER BUILDER (5.2.20) is the right way to
 create objects, we need to partition the details of how to construct
 objects of various classes into the various groups responsible for this
 construction, in other words we need to have LOOSE INTERFACES (5.2.17).
 We want to complete FORM FOLLOWS FUNCTION (5.1.11) or ORGANIZATION
 FOLLOWS LOCATION (5.1.8). On a lower level we want to implement
 DEVELOPER CONTROLS PROCESS (4.1.17) for a system which creates objects
 of various types. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
In a distributed work group it is important to divide responsibilities for creational systems as cleanly as possible and reduce coupling. 
Sometimes the secrets of classifying elements in a data stream are
 divided between various groups. The reasons for this partitioning can
 involve company politics, or simply that the knowledge of the telemetry formats is distributed and there is a strong desire to reduce coupling. We need a way to partition the responsibilities for classifying
 the telemetry packets, while maintaining a centralized client interface,
 and keeping VARIATION BEHIND INTERFACE (5.2.15). 
In a telemetry application, various instruments can generate telemetry which is then fed into one stream. The instruments are developed
 by different teams (at different institutions, for example), and these
 teams have control over the format of the telemetry that they generate
 (after taking some standard headers into account). 
We want a way to isolate the details for identifying each team’s
 objects, while at the same time allowing the objects to be identified and
 created in a single application. The scheme that we develop should be
 layered so that the main factory needs to know only of the existence of
 a class of objects, but need not know how deep the hierarchy below
 that class is. Packets created from the hierarchy are processed in a
 generic way, perhaps by using virtual functions. 
One way to address the classification problem is to put all the classification/dispatch logic into a single PARSER BUILDER (5.2.20) (combining
 the Interpreter [GOF1995] pattern with a Builder [GOF1995])—perhaps
 by using a big switch statement—and rely on communications
 between groups to ensure that the details make it into the master code
 through some communications method. This is error prone, and subject to delays. We could also divide the processing into a number of
 factories and have the client call each in turn. This violates our requirement of transparency, and the client needs to know when a new class
 of object is added. 
It would be useful to have a way to have the client interface emulate
 a single Factory, but hide the details of the construction hierarchy. 
To summarize the forces: 
• Division of responsibilities (ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION
 (5.1.8)). 
• A need for a central interface for parsing data streams and building objects. 
• A need to add objects to the construction hierarchy in a manner
 transparent to clients. 
• The ability (or requirement) to process entities by virtual functions. 
 • Each class of object can know about its immediate derived
 classes. 
Therefore: 
Use a hierarchy of factories, each of which understands the criteria for making a packet of its type, and knows about the immediate subtypes. The client invokes the make method with the base
 class factory instance. That factory checks to see that there is indeed an
 object of class packet in the stream, based on some attributes. The factory then passes the data stream to the factories of each of its immediate subclasses, which check the appropriate data fields in the
 manner of the PARSER BUILDER (5.2.20) pattern. 
The Singleton pattern [GOF1995] can be used to access the factories
 for the derived classes, or the members of the hierarchy can be registered with the master factory at run time. 
While this pattern violates encapsulation to some extent by
 requiring that a base class know about its immediate subclasses, it can
 be made acceptable by agreeing on generic interface classes (say, one
 per team) and allow each team free reign to subclass these interface
 classes. Also in this application this requirement is not terribly limiting, since the top level operations team knows about the basic instrument team interfaces and the number of instrument teams is fixed by
 contract when the project begins. 
Hierarchy of Factories 
An example implementation in C++ is: 
//Base class factory method 
Packet* PacketFactory::make(Stream* dataStream){ 
Packet* pkt=0; 
if(isAPacket(dataStream) { 
if(! pkt = APacket::factory()->make(dataStream)) 
if(!pkt = BPacket::factory()->make(dataStream)) { 
 pkt = new Packet(dataStream); 
} 
return pkt; 
} 
The result of applying this pattern is that each class needs to know
 only: 
• The criteria for what constitutes a member of that class in terms
 of elements in the data stream. 
• The immediate subclasses. 
It is possible to use a Registration mechanism to inform the base
 class of what the subclasses are rather than hard coding the relationship. (This pattern is not yet written, but would specify a mechanism
 for notifying a base class factory that a derived class factory has been
 created. The basic idea would be similar to the View/Model connection in a Model/View/Controller mechanism, but would also address
 issues of uniqueness (only one instance of each derived class can
 notify a base class) and guaranteed notification: The construction of
 any object/factory of the derived classes would generate a registration
 event automatically). 
It is also possible to implement this pattern using containment
 rather than inheritance. 
Other uses: 
This pattern is also useful for isolating the definition of packets for
 which a single team is responsible, so the information can be encapsulated, making it easier to work on a project with large or widely distributed teams. 
Related Patterns 
This is similar to the Builder [GOF1995] pattern in that it has a hierarchy of “factories.” It is different in that the data stream defines what
 is made rather than the application explicitly specifying what objects
 to construct by arguments to the factory. 
It is also similar to CHAIN OF RESPONSIBILITY [GOF1995]. This pattern
 specializes CHAIN OF RESPONSIBILITY for a creational system, and uses the
 different handlers to facilitate separation of design responsibilities. 
This pattern helps us realize ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION (5.1.8)
 and CODE OWNERSHIP (5.2.13) [Coplien1995]. This pattern implements
 SUBCLASS PER TEAM (5.2.18) for a creational system.