COUPLING DECREASES LATENCY *
 Northern Pacific freight train going over Bozeman Pass. Gallitan County, 
Montana. 
...the organization supports a service process or, in some special
 cases, a small design/implementation process using an iterative or
 incremental approach. Responsiveness is important, but you note that
 development intervals are too long and market windows are not met. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The structure of an organization can artificially reduce the
 throughput and increase the latency of business processes. And in
 some business processes, speed (time-to-market, service responsive
ness) are of the essence. An organizational structure that causes information to flow through many roles not only increases latency (delay),
 but can cause loss of information fidelity. Like light, as information
 passes through many filters, it loses definition and accuracy. 
Process stages should be independent to reduce coupling and
 thereby promote developer independence; developers can be more
 effective the less that their work is encumbered by communication.
 Furthermore, independence improves opportunities for parallelism.
 But independence hampers information flow. 
Therefore: 
Open communication paths between roles to increase the overall
 coupling/role ratio, particularly between central process roles. Communication between roles can be shaped using patterns such as WORK
 FLOWS INWARD (4.1.18), which helps concentrate more communication
 on the core of the organization, and RESPONSIBILITIES ENGAGE (5.1.14),
 which deals with the issue more broadly. Both of these can be helped
 more generally with MOVE RESPONSIBILITIES (5.1.18). 
This pattern suggests either increasing the density of the communication network, or finding the key communication paths that are
 important to market success and focusing on making them more effective (e.g., communications between marketing and engineering). This
 organization, a support organization, has a highly responsive process,
 which owes in part to its high degree of internal coupling: 
The second approach is more difficult because it’s difficult in general to know which communication links are more important than
 others. Organizational introspection can help identify such links, however. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Coupling of course increases dependence between roles, which
 may not always be a good thing. 
This pattern is somewhat related to INTERRUPTS UNJAM BLOCKING
 (4.1.25). Information flow in an organization can be compared to a
 batch processing system or a timesharing system. In the batch mode of
 communication, information comes through certain central roles in the
 organization (generally manager-type roles), and then is disseminated
 to the producer roles. In a timesharing mode of communication, interrupts drive the communication, thus decreasing communication
 latency, as information flows to the producer roles directly and in a
 timely manner. 
Hand offs can increase latency. The number of “hops” between
 roles should be kept small for any given problem. Eliminating “pipe
line” and “deadbeat” roles helps eliminate hops. One way to do so is
 to use HUB SPOKE AND RIM (5.1.17), where appropriate. In fact, that pattern is a logical step from this one. Occasional close coupling between
 developers and testers reduces administrative overhead, which
 reduces latency. 
The pattern is based on a basic software engineering principle that
 reflects itself in the organization. 