FACE TO FACE BEFORE WORKING REMOTELY **
 Camp Carson, Colorado. Colonel Wilfrid M. Nlunt, the commanding officer 
shakes hands with Colonel Denetrius Xenos, military attache of the Greek 
ambassador to the United States — a face-to-face meeting before working 
remotely. 
Designing a new aircraft is a big deal. A very big deal. It’s very involved,
 very expensive, and pretty risky. It takes the coordinated efforts of many different teams. When the Boeing Corporation began work on the new 777 airplane, it brought everyone on the project together for a kickoff meeting. There
 were thousands of people, all together, to get the project off on the right foot.
 Fortunately, Boeing owns many large aircraft hangers, so it could accommodate a meeting of that size. 
...market or personnel conditions sometimes require that a project
 be geographically distributed. In such cases, ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS
 LOCATION (5.1.8) is used to partition the work. But even when the work
 is partitioned in this manner, it is a challenge to actually implement the
 partitioning effectively. It may look good on paper, but the real people
 will run into a host of difficulties as they work it out. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
 The pull of local organizations is so strong that it can overwhelm
 common architecture, market, and social aspects of a project. 
Geographic distance makes communication harder. Different time
 zones create logistical difficulties for conversations. The cultural differences that often go hand-in-hand with long-distance cooperative work
 are sometimes staggering. The obvious problem is finding common
 times, but there are more subtle forces at work. One project was split
 between the United States and England. Conference calls took place in
 the morning in the U.S., which was late afternoon in England. Consequently, the U.S. people were fresh, but their colleagues in England
 were winding down, ready to hit the local pub. 
Difficulties in communication often weaken direct, effective communication paths, shunting communications to more indirect paths
 through the organization. Local leaders receive marching orders and
 pass them to their colleagues, but unintentionally add their own interpretation. Some may remember the children’s game, “gossip” where a
 message is whispered from one player to another until it bears no
 resemblance to the original message. 
Although partitioning the project along geographic lines is necessary it has the side effect of isolating one location from another. They
 must communicate at defined interfaces (see STANDARDS LINKING LOCATIONS (5.2.12)), and this results in people working on these interfaces
 without being able to get to know the person at the other end. People
 naturally tend not to work as well with those they don’t know. It’s
 hard to work with someone who is no more than a remote keyboard or
 a faceless voice on the phone. 
Therefore: 
Begin a distributed project with a fact-to-face meeting for
 everyone. This meeting should establish project unity, as well as
 give people a chance to get to know those they work with. 
The meeting establishes unity by talking about project goals,
 intended markets, competitors, and the project architecture (important). (It isn’t necessary that the architecture be nailed down yet; in
 fact, this can be a springboard for LOCK ’EM UP TOGETHER (5.2.5).) 
The social aspects of a meeting are vitally important. Betsy Hanes
 Perry notes, “It is vital to leave at least half of the on-site time as
 UNSCHEDULED TIME. This allows group members to have impromptu
 conversations with the people they’re closely coupled to. If you don’t
 provide time for these conversations, you will find that bathroom
 breaks stretch on forever, and that the visitors leave frustrated.” Steve
 Berczuk adds: “At Kodak we once had a group meeting of everyone in
 the division, from every location. The agenda was packed so tightly
 that we never really got a chance to meet each other.” These social
 interactions are one of the reasons that videoconferences are no substitute for the face-to-face meeting. 
Every organization needs a place to call “home”. Hold the meeting
 in a place that is memorable because of its uniqueness, beauty, great
 food, or other memorable quality, so that the group can identify with
 that place and its good memories. Hold group activities at that place,
 beyond the drone of everyday business activities, that will make the
 place memorable. 
In a large project, the prospect of an initial face-to-face meeting may
 be daunting. But the Boeing company brought thousands of people
 together at the inception of the 777 project. Of course, they do own a
 few planes... 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The importance of this initial meeting should not be underestimated. For a distributed project, it may be the very best way to establish UNITY OF PURPOSE (4.2.12). Furthermore, the social aspects of
 people getting to know each other go a long way toward resolving the
 tension between ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION (5.1.8) and STANDARDS
 LINKING LOCATIONS (5.2.12). It sets up an environment where you can do
 SHAPING CIRCULATION REALMS (5.1.12) successfully. 
An initial meeting of everyone can easily be followed (often immediately) by a LOCK ’EM UP TOGETHER (5.2.5) architectural session. 
It may not stop with a single meeting. You may find that regular “all
 hands” meetings are worth the transportation expenses.