HUB SPOKE AND RIM
 ...you have a design and implementation process in a well-under
stood domain, and want to implement the principles of DECOUPLE
 STAGES (5.1.16). The organization is mature and the process well-understood; it is fairly well optimized and has good partitioning in the spirit
 of DIVIDE AND CONQUER (5.1.6). Mature development organizations
 have well-defined development stages—such as requirements acquisition, design, and coding. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Some processes can almost be automated, but still require a
 degree of human intervention and coordination. This is particularly
 true for highly detailed processes. 
For example, even if a process is mature enough to have well-delineated development phases, it may need additional mechanisms to
 integrate these stages and coordinate the interactions between them. 
Process stages should be decoupled to reduce the communication
 associated with hand offs and promote independence between stages.
 Such independence creates opportunities for parallelism and increased
 throughput. Yet independence generally hampers information flow. 
 Therefore: 
Link each role to a central role that orchestrates process activities,
 with the activities taking place serially. The hub plays a simple coordination and management function to ensure all steps are completed
 successfully, while the work is done in the rim. The “rim” carries the
 hand off and its associated information between roles. The “spokes”
 provide the link to the central coordinating agent, and are lighter links
 of communication than between the “rim” roles. 
This organization, a front-end process for a large development
 project, exhibits HUB SPOKE AND RIM: 
The process supports sales and marketing activities and is highly
 responsive. 
The hub role should be encouraged to avoid micro-managing, particularly with respect to the mechanisms individual rim roles use in
 achieving their tasks. The hub role should scrutinize deadlines and
 schedules and should be in close enough contact with the rim roles to
 facilitate hand offs from role to role if necessary, and to communicate
 the state changes to other parts of the project as necessary. In this
 sense, the hub role can also act as a natural FIRE WALL for the rim roles. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
 The rim roles still maintain a good modicum of autonomy; each can
 focus on its own domain-specific task. There need not be any essential
 domain coupling between the roles on the rim; the only coupling is
 with respect to sequencing. The hub can coordinate that coupling and
 can optimize it (juggle priorities, give different projects or customers
 different priority) to meet project priorities. The hub is a management
 role rather than a development role—a controller or sequencer. The
 hub role holds things together and ensures that progress ensues from
 state to state. Here, we want to ensure progress in the process; compare
 with the design pattern SOMEONE ALWAYS MAKES PROGRESS (4.1.20). HUB
 SPOKE AND RIM is an implementation pattern that achieves the intent of
 SOMEONE ALWAYS MAKES PROGRESS (4.1.20) in a limited context. 
Prof. Aaron Gelman (Northwestern University) notes that in the
 contemporary airline market, the hub pattern contributes to congestion. Many airlines are acquiring small planes that can take small numbers of passengers directly between end destinations, acting as “hub
 busters” and relieving such congestion. The analog is a concern for
 over-application of this pattern. (WBBM Radio News, Chicago, IL,
 Sep. 30, 2000) 
The organization must be wary of the central role becoming a bottleneck, and address such bottlenecks with other patterns (e.g., MOVE
 RESPONSIBILITIES (5.1.18)). 
This configuration has higher latency than a highly coupled process, but it is likely to be able to support higher throughput (see COUPLING DECREASES LATENCY (5.1.22)). However, it cannot easily support
 essentially creative processes that are common to design, coding, and
 testing. In the creative process of design, communication is more
 important than sequencing, since a repeatable sequence is unlikely to
 be found in such a creative process. 
In a less mature domain, it is more appropriate to apply DEVELOPER
 CONTROLS PROCESS (4.1.17) as the alternative. Most domains in fact lack
 the maturity for HUB SPOKE AND RIM to be appropriate. 
Parallelism can be re-introduced if the central role pipelines activities become a bottleneck.