MOVE RESPONSIBILITIES *
 Moving responsibilities among roles is a delicate balancing act. 
...you want to change the communication patterns of the organization as a whole, not in a way that depends on a specific role, but in a
 way that optimizes the effectiveness of communication of an entire
 organization. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Unscrutinized relationships between roles can lead to poor
 overall patterns of coupling in the greater organization. 
In the spirit of CONWAY’S LAW (5.1.7), organizations tend to form
 around loci of communication; that is, the roles tend to communicate
 chiefly with each other, rather than to other (small) organizations in
 the larger enterprise. But some roles find themselves pulled in two different directions: they have substantial communication needs outside
 the organization. 
You want cohesive roles. And you want cohesive organizations. Decoupled organizations are more important than cohesive roles. And
 there may be fundamental trade-offs between coupling and cohesion.
 Moving an entire role from one process or organization to another
 doesn’t reduce the overall coupling, but only moves the source. You
 could move a person from one organization to another organization to
 make things more balanced, but responsibilities don’t always align
 with individuals. You could replicate responsibilities across multiple
 roles or organizations to increase locality; however, that tends to confuse ownership and coordination, and is not guaranteed to decrease
 the coupling, anyway. 
Therefore: 
Move responsibilities from the role that creates the most undesirable coupling, to the roles coupled to it from other processes. Simply
 said, this is load balancing. The responsibilities should not be shifted
 arbitrarily; a chief programmer team organization is one good way to
 implement this pattern (in the context for Developer role responsibilities). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The new process may exhibit more highly de-coupled groups. It is
 important to balance group cohesion with the de-coupling, so this pattern must be applied with care. For example, the Developer role is
 often the locus of a large fraction of project responsibilities, so the role
 appears overloaded. Arbitrarily shifting Developer responsibilities to
 other roles can introduce communication overhead. A chief pro
grammer team approach to the solution helps balance these forces. 
HALLWAY CHATTER (5.1.15) is an alternative load-balancing pattern;
 RESPONSIBILITIES ENGAGE (5.1.14) can be seen as a refinement of this pattern that evens load. UPSIDE DOWN MATRIX MANAGEMENT (5.1.19) is a
 refinement of this pattern that’s particularly applicable across enterprise boundaries. 
Most of the design rationale follows from the forces themselves. 
This is isomorphic to Mackenzie’s model that task interdependencies, together with the interdependencies of task resources and their
 characteristics, define project roles [Mackenzie1986]. 
 This organization can be improved by redistributing some of the
 responsibilities of Tester at the bottom center.