ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION **
 Different parts of the country may have different cultures and architectural styles. 
I was once involved in planning a large project that was to be split between
 two locations. My organization was located in a new building in Colorado
 with blue carpet. The other half of the project was in New Jersey; their
 building had green carpet. When I presented our plan to my organization, I
 showed slides with different parts of the architecture colored blue or green,
 depending on where the development was to take place. The organization got
 the message immediately. 
...a product must be developed in several different hallways, on different floors of a building, in different buildings or at different locations. This may owe to political reasons or to the need to have some
 development teams colocated with remote markets, or for reasons of
 standards or the distribution of physical facilities (e.g., the separation
 between different trading centers, or between a radio telescope site
 and a research university that uses its data), or even economic or trade
 issues that drive development to a different country. 
There needs to be a degree of trust and camaraderie within an organization, since an organization is a decision-making body that must
 converge on and buy into joint decisions. Allegiance to an organization
 falls strongly along the lines of geographic distribution. 
 ✥ ✥ ✥ 
It is important to assign tasks and roles insightfully across a geographically distributed work force. 
Communication patterns between project members follows geographic distribution. Coupling between pieces of software must be sustained by analogous coupling between the people maintaining that
 software. People avoid communicating with people who work in other
 buildings, other towns, or overseas (see below). People in an organization usually work on related tasks, which suggests that they communicate frequently with each other. 
Therefore: 
The architectural partitioning should reflect the geographic partitioning, and vice versa. Architectural responsibilities should be
 assigned so decisions can be made (geographically) locally. 
This is a variant of CONWAY’S LAW (5.1.7). Since the organization will
 follow the architecture, you want the organization, architecture, and
 geography to line up. Geographical considerations are often the most
 severe, and since architecture can be a strong lever for organization, it
 is a good tool to bring these three aspects into alignment. 
One of the most significant characteristics of geographic differences
 is allegiance: people are naturally more loyal to local managers than to
 remote managers. This is even more extreme if a remote location is
 part of a company as a result of a merger or acquisition. If work is split
 between two locations where the work itself does not split cleanly, one
 or the other location must be in charge. And that naturally causes
 resentment on the part of the other location. Instead, try to make the
 work assignments as autonomous as practical; this instills trust. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Sub-organizations that can be further split or organized by market
 or other criteria (see ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS MARKET (5.1.9), WORK FLOWS
 INWARD (4.1.18), and others). You still need someone to break logjams
 when consensus can’t be reached, perhaps using ARCHITECT CONTROLS
 PRODUCT (5.2.3) or PATRON ROLE (4.2.15). If the organization is modularized along geographic boundaries, and the architecture is not then it
 will be impossible to apply ARCHITECT ALSO IMPLEMENTS (5.2.10): it’s difficult for the architect at one location to oversee and contribute to the
 code at another. 
 Thomas Allen [Allen1977] has found that social distance goes up
 rapidly with physical separation (see also “House Cluster”
 ([Alexander1977], ff. 197) of Alexander). We have noted frequent cases
 of international collaboration (usually overseas) that strongly exhibit
 symptoms of this problem and which have had low prospects for success owing to just such separation. This is a crucial pattern that is often
 overlooked or dismissed out of consideration for political alliances or
 fashion (for example, outsourcing software development is very fashionable in management circles at this writing). Peter B¸rgi’s studies of
 geographically distributed organizations in AT&T bore out the importance of this pattern. 
We have seen few geographically distributed organizations that
 exhibit positive team dynamics. There are exceptions, and there are
 rare occasions when this pattern does not apply. Steve Berczuk (then at
 MIT) notes: "... communications need not be poor between remote sites
 if the following items are true: 
1. The number of developers on a project, including all sites is
 small; 
2. Most of the communication is done via something like email
 (wide distribution and asynchronous communication—in [one
 case of his experience] ... more people were in the loop than if the
 primary means of communication had been hallway chats); 
3. The people involved have been together for some time so that
 they feel like they know each other (this can be as short as a
 kickoff meeting; see FACE TO FACE BEFORE WORKING REMOTELY
 (5.1.10)); 
4. Folks aren’t so burned out by “unnecessary” travel that they are
 willing and happy to travel when it is needed. In some situations
 [complete work split by location] is not possible because of the
 nature of the project, so we need a way to address the issue of
 remoteness." (Personal communication with Steve Berczuk,
 August, 1994.) 
There are times when the market demands geographic distribution;
 see ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS MARKET (5.1.9) and [Berczuk1996]. In these
 cases you need FACE TO FACE BEFORE WORKING REMOTELY (5.1.10). 
As an organization grows, it may want to split geographically for a
 number of marketing and political reasons (DIVIDE AND CONQUER
 (5.1.6)). The OTI corporation relates how it splits organizations geographically to keep reusable assets uncontaminated by each other. 
That people be colocated within a building is probably more important to organizational effectiveness than to allocate offices as perks of
 seniority. Senior staff may have a need for larger or more secure offices
 than junior staff, but not for an office near the rest room or an office
 with a window. 
See STANDARDS LINKING LOCATIONS (5.2.12) as a technique supporting
 this organizational structure in the PEOPLE AND CODE PATTERN LANGUAGE
 (5.2).