 PRODUCER ROLES *  
 ...once you have identified the roles in the organization, you are in a
 position to optimize the role structure. This usually involves reducing
 the number of roles, particularly for mature organizations. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The overhead and bureaucracy in the organization is excessive, as
 manifest by the presence of too many roles. Yet all the roles seem
 important. It looks like there is no way to reduce the bureaucracy. 
An organization needs some bureaucracy to keep projects running
 smoothly; there is much administrative work to be done. Programmers don’t want to bother with it. But left unchecked, bureaucracy
 tends to grow: new roles get created and the communication overhead
 increases. 
People tend to gravitate to those roles they are most comfortable
 with. This is healthy. However, some people need the recognition associated with titles (German: Titelsucht), and roles are obligingly created
 to fill that need. Such roles have no intrinsic value to the project. 
Over time, the responsibilities of roles evolve. In some cases, the
 real benefit of a role drains off to other roles, leaving little more than a
 shell behind. In one organization, the chief responsibility of a particular role was “worry.” It added no value to the project. But because of
 the history of the role, it is easy to simply assume that the role is
 important. 
Therefore: 
Identify each role as a producer, supporter, or roles that add no
 value to the project (deadbeats). Eliminate the deadbeats, and in
 some cases, eliminate or consolidate some supporters. Nurture the
 producer roles; they are the ones that pay the bills. 
Producer roles are those roles that contribute directly to the end
 product; there is an obvious connection between their work and the
 revenue of the company. The canonical producer role in software organizations is “developer”. 
An organization has numerous support roles. These roles contribute to the effectiveness of the producer roles, but don’t directly
 develop the products. Many support roles are vitally important, such
 as FIRE WALLS (4.2.9), GATE KEEPER (4.2.10), and PATRON ROLE (4.2.15).
 Roles that provide computing support, for example, are also essential.
 But support roles are inherently higher in overhead than producer
 roles. There may be opportunities to gain efficiency by combining support roles. 
Deadbeat roles, as other types of roles, can be identified by their
 responsibilities. They may do nothing more than receive information
 and pass it on without adding any value to it. Watch for other responsibilities that add no value to the project, such as the aforementioned
 “worry.” If a role truly adds no value to the project, it should be eliminated. 
Note that in some cases, a role that passes information adds value
 by doing so. For example, a person who passes information by
 “pushing” it to those who would normally not get the information
 may prevent project inconsistencies, or might even detect such inconsistencies before they get out of hand (see WISE FOOL (4.2.21)). Such a
 role is an important support role. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Although eliminating roles fosters greater organizational efficiency,
 it may lead to bruised egos, or even feelings of insecurity. In some
 cases, roles might be preserved, but reshaped to contribute more
 directly to the project. Refer to FORM FOLLOWS FUNCTION (5.1.11) and
 SHAPING CIRCULATION REALMS (5.1.12) for further help. 
 It sets up PRODUCERS IN THE MIDDLE (5.1.4). There is a link to DOMAIN
 EXPERTISE IN ROLES (4.2.22). See also FIRE WALLS (4.2.9), GATE KEEPER
 (4.2.10), and PATRON ROLE (4.2.15).