RESPONSIBILITIES ENGAGE
 The responsibilities of raising children encourage parents to be actively 
engaged in their children’s lives. 
...the organization has been established, and people have settled
 into their roles. Communication tends to be centralized. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
If communication predominately flows through the center of the
 organization, two things happen: communication takes too long,
 and the most central roles become overburdened with communication.
The most central roles in an organization have the most information
 about the project, thus they are the most logical ones to transmit and
 receive information. However, they are also the key producer roles in
 the organization as well. So time they spend in communication
 directly impacts their development productivity. 
 But there must be central coordination (which is a weak form of
 control) or some other acceptable point of control. Fully distributed
 control tends to lead to control breakdown. Coordination helps
 accountability, efficiency, camaraderie, can reduce decision time for
 changes in the business environment (such as requirements changes),
 and so forth. 
Therefore: 
Shuffle responsibilities among roles in a way such that outer roles
 collaborate with roles other than the most central roles. 
 For example, a tester role may be isolated from the project. It would
 be well for the tester to learn which areas of the project are especially
 troublesome, so they can be tested especially rigorously. But this information is often not forthcoming. The tester could ask the key developers what the project “hot spots” are, but this would be inefficient
 and cause bottlenecks. Therefore, give the tester some project management responsibilities, where they actively participate in status meetings. They will pick up information relevant to testing through the
 project management responsibilities. 
Note that in some cases, moving responsibilities will actually cause
 roles themselves to migrate, and even merge. In most cases, that is
 actually a good thing. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
This infuses a level of “distributed control with central tendency”
 that lends overall direction and cohesion to an organization. It complements DIVIDE AND CONQUER (5.1.6), both by providing for bonds within
 organization clusters and by providing linkages between sub-clusters,
 linkages less formal than a GATE KEEPER (4.2.10) role. It adds symmetry
 to DIVIDE AND CONQUER. 
This pattern can stand on its own, but it is nicely completed by the
 application of HALLWAY CHATTER (5.1.15). 
Laurie Williams notes that DEVELOPING IN PAIRS (4.2.28) achieves
 some of the same effect. When she uses this in a pedagogical setting,
 students learn to rely more on each other and less on the teacher for
 answers to common questions.