THREE TO SEVEN HELPERS PER ROLE
 Chef and helpers in the camp kitchen. Allegan project, Michigan, 1937. 
...the organization has a basically functional social network. The
 organization shows overly strong centrality; individual roles are overloaded while others are starved for communication. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
An effective organization has a well-balanced distribution of
 communication. 
You don’t want to overload specific roles with interrupts, chatting
 with people, and meeting, which is a waste of resources. That causes
 the organization to be limited by overutilized resources. Manager roles
 often suffer from this problem, but so do roles staffed by domain
 experts. On the other hand, you must not starve other roles of human
 interaction, which drives them to work ineffectively and which results
 in a lowered process efficiency. Underutilization relates to information
 starvation and poor coupling to other roles. Overutilization can be
 caused by having too many suitors, particularly in the case where productivity falls because of thrashing, context switching, or indecision. 
Therefore: 
Organize the enterprise so each role has three to seven long-term
 stable relationships. 
 You can do this using MOVE RESPONSIBILITIES (5.1.18) and other ORGANIZATION CONSTRUCTION PATTERNS (CHAPTER 5). Most of this load balancing can build on intuitive and innovative shifting of work. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
This leads to a more balanced organization, with better load
sharing and fewer isolated roles. It helps DISTRIBUTE WORK EVENLY
 (5.1.13). 
It is possible, with a lot of focus and energy, to increase coupling
 and decrease latency, particularly for short periods of time; see COUPLING DECREASES LATENCY (5.1.22). 
For roles such as domain experts that become magnets for people,
 use a pattern like SACRIFICE ONE PERSON (4.1.22) or DAY CARE (4.1.23) to
 balance load. 
Our empirical results from the organizations studied in the Pasteur
 project show that, in most projects, any given role can sustain at most 7
 long-term relationships. In particularly productive organizations, the
 number can be as high as 9. Particular needs might suggest that the
 process designer go outside these bounds, if doing so is supported
 with a suitable rationale. 
The following histogram presents a distribution of collaborations
 per role for the roles in our early organizational analyses: 
The highest number of organizations (ten of them) is able to support four collaborators per role. As the number of collators per role
 increases we find fewer and fewer organizations are able to sustain
 those levels. But about 75% of the organizations can sustain three to
 seven helpers per role. 
Communication between roles is complete in an organization if
 every role communicates with every other role. As stated in DISTRIBUTE
 WORK EVENLY (5.1.13), the communication intensity ratio of an organization is the ratio of the number of communication paths of the busiest
 role to the average number of communication paths per role. For a
 given project size, Harrison has found this ratio to be lower in highly
 productive organizations than in average organizations
 [HarrisonCoplien1996].