UPSIDE DOWN MATRIX MANAGEMENT *
 A rowing team has a single point of reporting and allegiance, embodied by the coxswain. 
...you are assembling teams, and tend to build teams and organizations within the framework of the indigenous corporate structure. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Sometimes it is difficult to reconcile a task or work function with
 the existing organization of the enterprise. 
Assigning work to groups within your own organization may
 starve them from resources or expertise that they need. While GATE
 KEEPER (4.2.10) and other roles can deal with this problem in degree,
 sometimes the need is so great that no existing organizational structure seems to fit the need. 
For example, you may not have staffing resources that fit a given
 profile of domain expertise, which makes it difficult to achieve DOMAIN
 EXPERTISE IN ROLES (4.2.22). Or you may not be able to achieve scheduling goals with the staffing constraints of your organization. Or the
 problem may beg interdisciplinary solutions that don’t fit your current
 structure: the logical and physical business architectures may not be
 aligned. 
You could reorganize into a new set of disjoint groups that are a
 better fit for the problem, but there are always concerns that cut across
 others, so there is no guarantee that a useful disjoint partitioning even
 exists. 
Any team assignments you make may have long-term repercussions for the organization and architecture (per CONWAY’S LAW (5.1.7)).
 While some teams can be created to address intermittent problems,
 some of these “misfit” needs reflect bona fide long-term core competencies or business concerns. That begs an organization to nurture
 such work. 
Therefore: 
Form new groups from the right roles and people in a way that
 may cut across the current organizational structure. Temper legacy
 structures that owe to casuistic barriers (historical, political, or organizational boundaries). Challenge financial barriers that keep the dys
functional partitionings in place by adjusting funding models. 
Often these new structures can be found in organizations other than
 your own. Consider creating these structures in the customer space, or
 partner with other internal organizations, external contractors, and
 suppliers to fill these organizational needs. However, beware of
 jumping to the outsourcing solution. Carefully create groups and
 teams around key areas of competency and concern, letting the partitioning fall across enterprise boundaries where it may. Temper with
 the pattern ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION (5.1.8); its forces are probably more powerful than those at work here. 
Note the name of this pattern. In a matrix-management paradigm,
 individuals or groups are asked to report to two (or more) managers in
 an attempt to solve this problem. This turns that notion on its head:
 instead of multiple reporting roles, a separate team is formed, so that
 the team members have a single point of reporting and allegiance. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
In his pattern WORK ALLOCATION (10.5.29), which is related to this
 one, Beedle reports use of this pattern between Navistar and Good
 Year. Navistar has shifted some of its work back to its suppliers.
 Instead of managing its own warehouse inventory of tires to be
 installed on the trucks it manufactures, it delegates Good Year, its supplier to do that, because they have better inventory management
 methods. He also reports similar arrangements between Wal Mart and
 its suppliers, and between Ford and its suppliers. 
 THE WATER COOLER (5.1.20) is similar to this pattern, but works in the
 space of everyday social life rather than in institutional structures.