APPLICATION DESIGN IS BOUNDED BY TEST DESIGN *
 An M4 tank tops the ridge on a test course. The tank was designed to meet all 
the challenges of the test course — the test course should simulate all the 
extremes of the field. 
...a development organization has mechanisms to document and
 enforce the software architecture, and developers to write the code.
 You are planning how to engage your customer. A Testing role is being
 defined. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
When do you design and implement test plans and scripts? 
Test development takes time, and cannot be started just when the
 coding is done (“when we know what we have to test”). 
Scenarios are known when requirements are known, and many of
 these are known early (see SCENARIOS DEFINE PROBLEM (4.2.8)). 
Test implementation needs to know the details of message formats,
 interfaces, and other architectural properties in great details (to support test scripts and test jigs). Both software developers and testers
 need to work closely together from the same “script”—the Use Cases
 that define customer needs. 
 Yet external tests are largely ignorant of the internal software structure, so much test development can take place in parallel with design
 and implementation of the deliverable software. Implementation
 changes daily; there should be no need for test designs to track ephemeral changes in software implementation. 
Therefore: 
Use case-driven test design starts when the customer first agrees
 to use case requirements. Test design evolves along with software
 design, but only in response to customer use case changes: the
 source software is inaccessible to the tester. When development
 decides that architectural interfaces have stabilized, low-level test
 design and implementation can proceed. 
Software designers can and should use test specifications as a major
 touchstone for requirements. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
This provides a context for SCENARIOS DEFINE PROBLEM and complements ENGAGE QUALITY ASSURANCE (4.2.29). Once the expectations are
 established between the testers and developers in the context of customer expectations (perhaps through FIRE WALLS (4.2.9) and GATE KEEPER (4.2.10)) you can approach the customer to capture Use Cases. 
Making the software accessible to testers causes them to see the
 developer view rather than the customer view, and leads to the chance
 they may test the wrong things, or at the wrong level of detail. Fur
thermore, the software will continue to evolve from requirements until
 the architecture gels, and there is no sense in causing test design to
 fishtail until interfaces settle down. 
In short, test design kicks off at the end of the first major influx of
 requirements, and touches base with design again when the architecture is stable.