COMPENSATE SUCCESS **
 When I was in fourth grade (about 9 years old), we had a spelling test
 every Friday. Our teacher told us that if everyone got a perfect score on a
 spelling test, she would bring each of us a candy bar the following Monday.
 We were excited about the prospect, but as time went on, it seemed that it
 might never happen. There were always some who just couldn’t seem to spell.
 Jimmy was probably the worst speller of all. He typically missed about half the
 words. There was no hope with him in the class. 
But one week the words were particularly easy. In the practice test on
 Wednesday, everyone except Jimmy got all the words right. And Jimmy
 missed only four words. The anticipation in the class was electric, as we all
 gave special help and encouragement to Jimmy. On Friday, when everyone
 got a perfect score, it was hard to tell whether we were more excited about the
 upcoming candy bar or for Jimmy’s success. 
...a group of developers is striving to meet tight schedules in a high
payoff market. It is important to reward individuals in a way that
 motivates them to do things that achieve business objectives in line
 with the value system of the enterprise. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Successful projects remain successful by rewarding behaviors
 that lead to success. 
 Schedule motivations tend to be self-fulfilling: a wide range of
 schedules may be perceived as equally applicable for a given task.
 And schedules are poor motivators. 
Some organizations count on altruism, but altruism and egoless
 teams are quaint, Victorian notions. 
Companies often embark on make-or-break projects, and such
 projects should be managed differently from others. 
You need both to reward teams and outstanding individuals. Yet
 disparate rewards motivate those who receive them, but may frustrate
 their peers. 
You need both to reward solid workers and risk-takers; yet from an
 economic perspective, you need to manage the risk of any investment
 into speculative work. And if speculative work fails, and the contributors are rewarded according to performance, it will disincent the organization from embarking on future risk-taking projects. 
Some contributions are difficult to quantify, such as those of THE CATALYST (see Peopleware by De Marco and Lister) who facilitates
 communication between team members and perhaps helps morale. 
Therefore: 
Establish lavish rewards for individuals contributing to successful make-or-break projects. The entire team (social unit) should
 receive comparable rewards, to avoid de-motivating individuals who
 might assess their value by their salary relative to their peers. “Very
 special” individuals might receive exceptional awards that are tied les
 strongly to team performance. 
A celebration is a particularly effective reward
 [ZuckermanAndHatala1992]. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
As a result, you get an organization that focuses less on schedule
 (but see SIZE THE SCHEDULE (4.1.2)) and more on customer satisfaction
 and systemic success. 
In most enterprises you do not want to reward risk-taking in a way
 that encourages people to take risks that don’t serve the long-term viability of the enterprise. The reward should always be more focused on
 meeting the organization’s goals than on how the goals are met. If the
 organization’s job is to produce a product, then reward people for
 what they do in support of delivering the product. Sometimes this
 includes an element of risk-taking, and to that degree risk-taking
 should be rewarded. However, you want to remove obstacles to risktaking. That will allow people to take appropriate risks motivated by
 meeting organizational objectives, rather than for the sake of having
 taken a risk. See more about this in the pattern SKUNK WORKS (4.2.14). 
Similarly, most software development organizations shouldn’t
 encourage people to seek crisis situations as opportunities for the contributions that will receive the highest reward. That almost guarantees
 that the project will become crisis driven. There are some jobs that are
 legitimately built around a hero culture, such as (real-world) fire fighters and their figurative namesakes inside software projects, but
 these are the exception rather than the rule. Be sure to reward what the
 organization values, knowing that people will tend to do what they
 are rewarded to do. 
Similarly, it can be problematic to reward those who work for the
 sake of the work ethic alone. Reward working smart more than
 working hard; there should be no prize for the most hours worked.
 Paul Bramble relates: 
Working for stock options that could be expected to turn into 
$12 million was a horrible experience. And having peers with 
similar expectations only made it worse. It clouded their 
judgment and they stopped using DOMAIN EXPERTISE IN ROLES 
(4.2.22). Instead, they started giving the more difficult assign
ments to the perceived “gung-ho” crowd rather than to the 
people most likely to be able to do them. ... Some of the fanatics were regularly working 80-hour weeks and used the 
reward system as leverage to exact punishment against those 
who tried to work reasonable hours and balance work and 
family life. 
The liability of high rewards for meeting key corporate objectives is
 that people who take on those responsibilities can over-extend them
selves, leading to personal stress with potential risk to the project. This
 is particularly problematic for rewards to management staff who run
 the risk of developing a burnout culture in their subordinates to meet
 the objectives (see “The Psychology of Burnout” in THE OPEN CLOSED PRINCIPLE OF TEAMS (6.1.4)). 
There are factors that lead to success that are difficult to measure or
 even identify, so it’s best to orient the rewards around the organiza
 tion’s shared value system of what is important to achieve. Scoping
 the concern of “organization” in this context is key to the long-term
 success of the enterprise; a closed group can’t sustain values that are
 inconsistent with those of the enclosing organization or the next
 higher level of management. 
Success makes it possible to build up the work environment infrastructure, making it a more attractive place to work. This is a form of
 long-term compensation or of recognition of success and is particularly important in team settings. In one organization we used windfall
 funds to buy an interactive terminal which, in that era (about 1974)
 was a treat for the staff. On a broader scale you can buy an espresso
 machine (for which Bell Labs computer science research was famous),
 just a coffee machine, or a water cooler—or build an entire culture of
 food. See the pattern THE WATER COOLER (5.1.20). 
High rewards to some individuals may still de-motivate their peers,
 but rewarding on a team basis helps remove the “personal” aspect of
 this problem, and helps establish the mechanism as a motivator, in
 addition to being just a postmortem soother. On the other hand, see
 the discussion in THE ROLE OF MANAGEMENT (6.3.7) that puts individual
 contributions in a broader perspective: are individual successes really
 just team success in misleading packaging? 
The grounding for this pattern is empirical. There is a strong correlation between wildly successful software projects, and a lucrative
 reward structure. Cases include QPW, cases cited at the Risk Derivatives Conference in New York on 6 May 1994; see Pay and Organization
 Development, by Edward E. Lawler, Addison-Wesley, 1981. The place of
 reward mechanisms is well-established in the literature
 [Kilmann1984]. 
Dennis DeBruler noted at the PLoP review of this pattern, that most
 contemporary organization culture derives from the industrial complex of the 1800s, which was patterned after the only working model
 available at the time: military management. (One common model of
 military management is: REWARD INDIVIDUALLY PUNISH CORPORATELY,
 which leads to fear of failing and resentment towards those who fail.)
 He notes that most American reward mechanisms are geared more
 toward weeding out problems than toward encouraging solutions. A
 good working model is that of groups of doctors and lawyers, where
 managers are paid less than the employees. 
 Paul Bramble adds, “The trick is to be discerning—sometimes it’s
 the quiet plodders who generate the success, and you have to be able
 to see past the self-promoting employees to see who really gets the
 work done.” 
See also COMPENSATE RESULTS [Beedle1997].