DOMAIN EXPERTISE IN ROLES **
 Naval air base, Corpus Christi, Texas. A top notch mechanic, Mary Josephine 
Farley expertly rebuilds airplane engines. Although she’s only twenty years 
old she has a private pilot’s license and has made several cross country flights. 
...you know the key atomic process roles (FORM FOLLOWS FUNCTION
 (5.1.11)) including a characterization of the Developer role. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Matching staff with roles is one of the hardest challenges of a
 growing and dynamic organization. All roles must be staffed, and, all
 roles must be staffed with qualified individuals. Just as in a play, several actors may be assigned to a single role, and any given actor may
 play several roles. 
You’d like to use domain-inspecific qualification criteria like college
 grades or years of experience to qualify people for jobs. Such an
 approach gives the project flexibility in staff allocation; it helps it avoid
 being overly dependent on individual skill sets and experience. In
 short, the hope that such criteria might work provides project managers a basis for keeping the project from becoming overly dependent
 on certain individuals; such individuals may leave or may hold the
 organization hostage for higher salaries or to see their own policies
 implemented unilaterally. Yet successful projects tend to be staffed
 with people who have already worked on successful projects. 
 Spreading expertise across roles complicates communication patterns. It makes it difficult for a developer or other project member to
 know who to turn to for answers to domain-specific requirements and
 design questions. 
Therefore: 
Hire domain experts with proven track records, and staff the
 project around the expertise emodied in the roles. Teams and groups
 will tend to form around areas of common domain interest and focus.
 Any given actor may fill several roles. In many cases, multiple actors
 can fill a given role. 
Domain training is more important than process training. 
Local gurus are good, in all areas from application expertise to
 expertise in methods and language. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
This is a tool that helps assure that roles can be successfully carried
 out. It also helps make roles autonomous. Empirically, highly productive projects (e.g., QPW) hire deeply specialized experts. OLD PEOPLE
 EVERYWHERE ([Alexander1977], ff. 215), talks about the need of the
 young to interact with the old. The same deep rationale and many of
 the same forces of Alexander’s pattern also apply here. 
This is also a systems principle that one finds in software development; see http://gee.cs.oswego.edu/dl/rp/roles.html . 
A seasoned manager writes, “The most poorly staffed roles are
 System Engineering and System Test. We hire rookies and make them
 System Engineers. (In Japan, only the most experienced person interacts with customers.) We staff System Test with ‘leftovers’; after we
 have staffed the important jobs of architecture, design, and developer.” 
Other roles (ARCHITECT CONTROLS PRODUCT (5.2.3), DEVELOPER CONTROLS PROCESS (4.1.17), MERCENARY ANALYST (4.1.24), and others) are prescribed by subsequent patterns. 
If expertise becomes too narrow, the organization is at risk of losing
 key expertise if a single person leaves, is promoted, etc. Temper this
 pattern with MODERATE TRUCK NUMBER (4.2.24). 
Domain experts can naturally come together in PROGRAMMING EPISODES (4.1.19). The pattern APPRENTICESHIP (4.2.4) helps maintain this
 pattern in the long term. DIVERSE GROUPS (4.2.16) is, in some sense, a
 more general version of this pattern. 
See also SUBSYSTEM BY SKILL (4.2.23) and UPSIDE DOWN MATRIX MANAGEMENT (5.1.19).