 ENGAGE QUALITY ASSURANCE **
 FSA (Farm Security Administration) supervisor and farmer-client examining quality of silage from trench silo. Sheridan County, Kansas 
...you have a development organization mature enough that roles
 have been congealed and a customer has been engaged (ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6)). You need some filter between the two to both facilitate
 and regulate interactions between them. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Customer engagement is a key element of quality assurance.
 Though developers feel they get everything right, a good dose of customer reality helps bring the perspective that perfect software is hard. 
Too many organizations defer quality until “later” or equate quality
 assurance with the late activity of testing. Yet success depends on high
 quality, and early feedback is important to address fundamental
 quality problems. 
It’s important to do testing, and most developers do their own
 testing. But individuals easily get blindsided by their own design
 thinking in terms of what needs to be tested. And they may use testing
 as their quality criterion; yet, you can’t test quality into a product: you
 can only build a product and test its quality. 
Therefore: 
Make QA a central role. Couple it tightly to development as soon
 as development has something to test. Test plan development can
 proceed in parallel with coding, but Developers declare the system
 ready for test. 
Quality Assurance (QA) was central to the development of Borland’s Quattro Pro for Windows: 
The QA organization should be outside the context of the project:
 the planning and reporting of tests should not be accountable to the
 development organization. The development organization develops a
 sense of accountability for delivering quality product, since their own
 view of their reputation is linked to minimizing the bugs that “those
 people in QA” find. 
QA should be engaged with marketing to understand the needs
 and challenges a system will face. 
QA people have skills and perspectives that allow them to view
 customer needs from a perspective that may not be reflected in
 requirements or other articulations of needs. A good example is security companies that develop security software utilities for commercial
 operating; their own probing of the operating system often uncovers
 security holes, and then they work with the vendor to fix the problems. 
 ✥ ✥ ✥ 
Having engaged QA, the project will be ready to approach the Customer. With QA and the Customer engaged, the quality assurance process can be put in place (use cases gathered, etc.). 
There are at least two reasons for making QA a separate organization from that holding Developers’ allegiance. First, test development
 shouldn’t be blind-sided by the Developer perspective. If both the
 Developer and QA perform their own tests, testing becomes a doubleblind experiment with the software as a subject. Second, QA should be
 put outside the domain of influence by the development organization
 in the interest of objectivity. This is an obvious pattern in QPW. 
Indeed, ENGAGE QUALITY ASSURANCE requires a separate QA organization. This is in contrast to the ideals espoused in Extreme Programming. XP advocates extensive unit testing, but in the words of Kent
 Beck, “documentation, design, formal review, separate QA; it’s all a
 waste of our time.” [Waters2000] This may be a reaction to organizations that have a separate QA organization, but do not engage it.
 That’s a recipe for disaster: you have the overhead of a separate organization, but not the benefits. In order for a separate QA organization
 to be effective, it must have frequent and positive interaction with
 development. 
Note that quality assurance should be engaged early in the project;
 by the time testing starts it is too late to build the trust needed for
 quality assurance to happen smoothly. This is spelled out in GET
 INVOLVED EARLY (10.5.13) [Delano1998]. It is not just the developers’
 responsibility to engage the testers; the testers must reach out to the
 developers as well (see DESIGNERS ARE OUR FRIENDS (10.5.10)
 [Delano1998].) 
See also APPLICATION DESIGN IS BOUNDED BY TEST DESIGN (4.2.30).