 FAILED PROJECT WAKE *
 The Trident project was the most exciting project I had ever worked on. We
 were a small team with an aggressive schedule, but we made good progress
 and were actually ahead of schedule. Then one day the the company made a
 major business decision that meant that the Trident project was probably
 unnecessary. Sure enough, the project was canceled a few days later. We all
 agreed that it was probably the right decision, and we appreciated the speed
 with which it was made, but it still hurt. 
For a week we walked around in a fog. We did nothing. Finally, we took the
 afternoon off, and had a party at someone’s home. We brought our families
 and played croquet in the back yard. After that it was much easier to move on
 to the next project. 
...projects fail for a variety of reasons. Many of these are attributable
 to the team involved in the project; in fact, this pattern language is
 designed to help with many such problems. But software developers
 don’t work in a vacuum. There are many external factors that contribute to the success or failure of any project. Changes in the market,
 for example, can doom a product before it ever gets out the door. You
 can have the greatest, hardest working team in the world, and their
 project still might get canceled, in spite of their best efforts. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
 Canceling a project, even for the best external reasons, is particularly demoralizing to a team that has put its heart and soul into it. 
It doesn’t matter much that the team members fully understand the
 reasons behind the cancellation, they still feel bad. They feel powerless, somewhat apathetic, and sometimes betrayed. At best, they will
 have some “down” time, even if they have another project to jump
 into immediately. At worst, they may quit. 
They may note that successful projects are rewarded, but it wasn’t
 their fault that their project was canned. This feeling of inequity can be
 strong. 
Therefore: 
Hold a wake for the failed project. This should be much the flavor
 of an Irish wake; a party for the dead. 
Don’t try to placate them with false statements of “success.” They
 all know the project bombed, so just hold a party over that. 
Go ahead and make it a big party; make it more than just cake and
 punch in the cafeteria. And make it a real party; it shouldn’t be a
 project retrospective. There is a time and a place for retrospectives, and
 this isn’t it. (Gerhard Ackermann [Ackermann2002] points out that it is
 possible to combine the two, if you have a strong facilitator, and the
 main purpose continues to be the wake.) 
It’s best to hold the wake off-site. That helps people break from the
 old project, and avoids even the appearance of a retrospective. 
It’s even more helpful to hold the wake during working hours; an
 afternoon works well. Holding the wake during work hours sends a
 subtle “thank-you” message: everyone knows they don’t get a bonus
 (see COMPENSATE SUCCESS (4.2.25)), but they appreciate some acknowledgment of their efforts. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Just like the death of a loved one, the death of a project causes a
 period of mourning. A wake helps people get through the stages of
 mourning. 
It also serves as a bit of a catharsis. People will come out of it much
 more ready to attack the next project, “and this time we’ll succeed!” It
 is particularly important for upper management explicitly to express
 appreciation for the effort, especially when the failure owes to business decisions rather than to decisions owned by the development
 team. Paul Bramble notes that this helps “calm people down and to be
 less worried about their future at the company.”