 FIRE WALLS **
 Nobody gets past this point without my permission! 
"A manager should be like the sweeper in curling: The sweeper runs ahead
 of the stone and sweeps away debris from the path of the stone so that the
 progress of the stone will be smooth and undisturbed — does this sound like
 your manager?" [Gabriel1996] 
Unfortunately, heavy human use in this same area could lead to bear/
 human interactions which could injure humans and cause management
 actions against the bear. — Sign at an entrance to Boulder Mountain Parks,
 Boulder, Colorado 
...an organization of developers has formed in a corporate or social
 context where they are scrutinized by peers, funders, customers, and
 other “outsiders.” Project implementors are often distracted by outsiders who feel a need to offer input and criticism. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
It’s important to placate stakeholders who feel a need to “help”
 by having access to low levels of the project, without distracting
 developers and others who are moving towards project completion 
 Isolationism doesn’t work: information flow is important. But communication overhead goes up non-linearly with the number of
 external collaborators. 
Many interruptions are noise. 
Maturity and progress are more highly correlated with being in
 control than being effectively controlled. 
Therefore: 
Create a MANAGER ROLE, who shields other development personnel from interaction with external roles. The responsibility of this
 role is “to keep the pests away.” 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The new organization isolates developers from extraneous external
 interrupts. To avoid isolationism, this pattern must be tempered with
 others, such as ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6) and GATE KEEPER (4.2.10). 
This pattern was present in both BORLAND QUATTRO PRO FOR WINDOWS (CHAPTER 8) and in A HYPERPRODUCTIVE TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVELOPMENT TEAM (CHAPTER 9). See also the pattern ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6),
 which complements this pattern. GATE KEEPER (4.2.10) is a pattern that facilitates effective flow of
 useful information; FIRE WALLS restricts detracting flow of (even potentially useful) information. You need a balance between them. In the
 park in Boulder, people (customers) come to see nature, and bears are
 a part of that nature. But if the customers interact too closely with the
 core contributors—to the point where it is a distraction—things can
 get out of control. Developers need information, and they can take
 advantage of customer contacts and GATE KEEPERS to get the information they need. But they can also use managers as a shield. Furthermore, managers may need to step in to “help” developers who may be
 afraid to ask not to be bothered by customer contacts, or who are at
 risk of not fulfilling their own responsibilities if they are embroiled in
 customer matters. 
Be warned that if the organization fills this role with someone motivated largely by personal power, the potential damage to the organization can be large. If other roles like GATE KEEPER maintain good contact
 with other organizations, communications are more likely to remain
 open and FIRE WALLS will more likely be called to account for selfserving actions. 
 Sun Tzu notes: “He will win who has military capacity and is not
 interfered with by the sovereign.” [SunTzu1989]