MODERATE TRUCK NUMBER
 In an insurance company we studied, the project scheduled some of their
 release dates around the vacation times of a small number of key staff. While
 this is much better than constraining vacation times to the release schedules,
 it would have been better if the project had been less dependent on those
 employees. As should have been predicted, the release date slipped and interfered with the vacation dates, anyhow. 
... you have built an organization around specialists whose background and training match the expertise required by the application
 and market, DOMAIN EXPERTISE IN ROLES (4.2.22). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
A project cannot become overly dependent on any small number
 of individuals. It’s important to have specialization. No amount of
 general accomplishment can compensate for experience. And this
 experience is embodied not in any abstract concept of roles, nor is it
 often found in any supporting document or knowledge base that a
 plug-compatible-interchangeable-developer could leverage. The
 expertise is most often embodied in a living human being who can
 make choices. 
Such human beings may make unpleasant choices, such as leaving
 the organization for another company. Or they may make silly choices,
 like walking out in front of a truck at a busy intersection, never to
 return to the project again. 
And life may make choices for such individuals, such as giving
 them prospects for promotion. Sadly enough, there is a high correlation between an individual’s perceived expertise and the chances that
 a company will offer them promotion to optimize the chances for the
 PETER PRINCIPLE to have its way. Or another project within the organization may take them away. 
It is a risk if there are too many cases where your project depends
 on such individuals for singular knowledge. You know you’re in
 trouble if your project keeps a list of people and schedules release
 dates around their vacation times. 
Yet it’s still important to embody expertise in individuals, since it
 reduces communication between individuals regarding decisions
 within a certain business area and ensures that the right experience is
 brought to bear in such decisions. 
And it’s important to recognize that everyone brings some expertise
 to the table; if everyone were the same, there would be useless redundancy in the organization (see DIVERSE GROUPS (4.2.16), HOLISTIC DIVERSITY (4.2.19)). 
Yet not everyone can know everything. Being a true expert in a
 topic requires all of one’s attention, and it is difficult to sustain multiple areas of expertise. 
Define the truck number as being the number of people in the organization who have unique critical domain expertise. You don’t want the
 truck number to be large, because that means that the probability is
 large that the loss of any given team member would mean the loss of
 critical expertise. The risk would be too high. Yet it’s impossible to
 make the truck number very small (it’s almost impossible to make it
 zero). Even if you could make it small, you probably wouldn’t—
 because if it were one, then everyone but the critical resource is intellectually redundant, and by some rationale, all the other members of
 the organization could turn into just overpaid worker bees or software
 assembly line workers. 
Therefore: 
Keep the truck number low; retain a small number of key experts
 with unique knowledge. Build a culture of shared knowledge that
 increases the breadth of knowledge over time, particularly for
 knowledge that easily can be codified, taught, or otherwise conveyed. 
How do you do this? One way is to use DEVELOPING IN PAIRS (4.2.28).
 Another is to make sure the experts rub shoulders with the mere mortals. Use ARCHITECT ALSO IMPLEMENTS (5.2.10). Of course, you retain a
 non-zero truck number by keeping the architects from becoming mere
 mortals themselves; see ARCHITECT CONTROLS PRODUCT (5.2.3). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Cross-training can be an effective technique for sharing knowledge.
 In particular, APPRENTICESHIP (4.2.4) is an effective form of crosstraining. However, some of the deepest knowledge and “good guts”—
 gut feeling—cannot be conveyed from an expert to an apprentice. 
A pattern language of the organization’s key competencies can provide some relief for experts and can reduce the risk for the organization. Collect patterns from domain experts. 
It is not the goal to level the playing field. You still need DOMAIN
 EXPERTISE IN ROLES (4.2.22). It is too expensive (in time and talent) to
 guard against any possible staff loss by completely replicating talent.
 You want enough cross-training to control the costs of recovery from
 losing a person. Trying to spread expertise too broadly will in fact just
 dilute the overall expertise by detracting from each expert’s focus. 
Truck Number is a measure of vulnerability of an organization. It’s
 usually pretty easy to calculate it: just ask yourself, “Which people in
 my project can we absolutely not do without?” It’s likely that several
 names immediately come to mind. These people are the key architects,
 programmers, or perhaps even testers. And they are critical in part
 because they know things that others don’t. So we try to get them to
 share that knowledge with the rest of the team. 
Note that although we speak of the Truck Number as a number, it
 has a subjective qualitative aspect to it as well. In other words, not all
 critical experts are created equal. The loss of some experts may cause
 serious problems, but the loss of others may be absolutely devastating! 
One of the authors once studied a small software company. While
 the company and its (single) product looked good, one particular
 employee seemed to be unusually dominant. If he were to leave, the
 company would be in serious jeopardy. Unfortunately, he did leave,
 and the company suffered greatly. The moral is to watch closely for
 such individuals, and make sure they continually share their expertise. 
Why doesn’t DEVELOPING IN PAIRS (4.2.28) solve the problem completely? It certainly helps, but people are still individuals, and have
 different skills. You can have a pair in which each member is good at
 something different; the pair is greater than the sum of the individuals. 
As with any risk reduction activity, reducing the Truck Number is
 an exercise in trade-offs. You may find that duplicating the expertise of
 certain people just isn’t cost — or time — effective. So you live with
 the risk. Maybe you try to reduce it in other ways, such as creating
 incentives for those people to stay on the team (see, for example, COM
PENSATE SUCCESS (4.2.25).)