SCENARIOS DEFINE PROBLEM *
 Discussing a worst-case scenario... 
How do you know a programmer is extroverted? He stares at YOUR shoes
 when he talks to you. 
...you want to engage the customer and need a mechanism to support other organizational alliances between customer and developers. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Design documents are often ineffective as vehicles to communicate the customer vision of how the system should work. 
There is a natural business distancing and mistrust between customers and developers. Communication between developers and customers is crucial to the success of a system. 
Therefore: 
Capture system functional requirements as use cases. 
It is obvious that use cases help increase understanding of the
 requirements, but a less obvious aspect of this is that they help set
 boundaries of the problem. This became clear as one of the authors
 (Neil) consulted with a group who was writing patterns of use cases.
 When I questioned a member of the group what problem use cases
 solve, I got an unsatisfying answer. I probed deeper by asking how the
 situation would look if one didn’t apply use cases, and he responded,
 “You wouldn’t know where to start, because the problem would be too
 broad.” Interestingly, he had never thought about use cases as a tool to
 bound the problem until that point. 
Use cases do not capture success scenarios alone, but all the scenarios that the system must deal with. There is no such thing as an
 exceptional case; make the exception the rule. Interview enough constituencies to get full coverage of the expectations of users and other
 stakeholders. Use cases also can, should, and almost certainly must be
 augmented with non-functional requirements. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
It is easy to see that this is a good idea, but what does this have to
 do with organizations? One of the tensions in many organizations is
 that the developers are, well, geeks. Many don’t have particularly
 good communication skills, or, more precisely, aren’t particularly
 interested in interpersonal communication. So it is difficult to communicate requirements to developers. Scenarios work. So if you really
 want to ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6), this pattern makes it much easier. 
The problem is now defined, and the architecture can proceed in
 earnest. You can use scenarios as a means of dialogue and requirements clarification with your users, particularly when building and
 demonstrating a system or subsystem prototype. For more on this, see
 CATALYTIC SCENARIOS in the DEMO PREP (10.5.9) pattern language from
 Todd Coram [Coram1996]. 
Also read about the MERCENARY ANALYST (4.1.24), who captures scenarios and uses them for project documentation (both internal and
 external). 
[Cockburn2000] is one of the most acclaimed references on use
 cases. Also see CACM Nov. ‘88 (v. 31, no. 11) pp 1268-1287, according
 to Ralph Johnson. Also Rubin and Goldberg [GoldbergRubin1995],
 who take scenarios all the way to the front of the process preceding
 design. See also [HsiaSamuelGaoKung1994].