 SELF SELECTING TEAM **
 Japanese-American volunteers taking oath of induction. 
I had applied for a job in a different part of the company. It was forward
looking work in a small team. The manager was happy to take me, but it
 wasn’t until the team had interviewed me that I got the job. 
... SIZE THE ORGANIZATION (4.2.2) revealed the need for a small, select
 team. How do you staff such a team? 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
The worst team dynamics can be found in appointed teams. 
There are no perfect criteria for screening team members. Yet broad
 interests (music and poetry for, example) seem to indicate successful
 team players. Teams staffed with such individuals are often willing to
 take 
extraordinary measures to meet project goals. 
However, when such interests are ignored, or when team members
 are appointed, team dynamics can suffer, greatly diminishing the productivity of a team. 
Therefore: 
Create enthusiastic teams by letting people select their own
 teams. Do limited screening on the basis of track record and broader
 interests. 
 Such teams often, but not always, come about of their own volition.
 Sometimes, a PATRON ROLE (4.2.15) or other leader can seed the idea of
 such a team first as a rallying point for the formation of the team. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
A SOLO VIRTUOSO (4.2.5) or APPRENTICESHIP (4.2.4) role may self-select
 a team. FORM FOLLOWS FUNCTION (5.1.11) can give such a team its structure. DIVERSE GROUPS (4.2.16) can help in the screening process. Temporary SELF SELECTING TEAMS can come together to work on PROGRAMMING
 EPISODES (4.1.19). 
A SKUNK WORKS (4.2.14) is a special kind of SELF SELECTING TEAM that
 comes together to share high risk on behalf of the organization. Self-selection can and should happen at finer granularity than
 teams, too; see, for example, DEPLOY ALONG THE GRAIN (5.2.8). 
This is different from “empowered teams.” Research has shown
 that empowerment leads to communication locales that can become
 blindsided to the broader context of surrounding teams and can
 unnecessarily narrow the communication channels between teams,
 though it may increase it within teams [Yates1995]. 
One danger to be aware of is that an exclusive group of friends may
 build a team from their own numbers, failing to take advantage of
 others’ skills. The PATRON ROLE (4.2.15) can monitor these dynamics.