SOLO VIRTUOSO *
 . . . we have described optimal sizes of organizations needed to
 create large software systems on time and within budget — SIZE THE ORGANIZATION (4.2.2). The following pattern explains what to do for
 smaller systems (less than twenty-five thousand lines of code), when a
 product must still be created on time and within budget, but when
 rapid growth is not anticipated after the first release. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
When a smaller software project (less than twenty-five thousand
 lines of code) is overstaffed, communication overhead increases and
 talented individuals, who could produce the software entirely on their
 own, are bridled, their “horsepower” diminished. 
We have said that organizational size affects the deliverable in a
 non-linear manner (SIZE THE ORGANIZATION (4.2.2)). We have also
 observed that communication overhead goes up as the square of the
 size, which means that the organization becomes less cohesive as the
 square of the size while the “horsepower” of the organization goes up
 only linearly. 
 The question then is, what organizational size works best for
 smaller software projects? 
The answer depends on the individual(s) involved in the project.
 The productivity of a single individual can be higher than that of a collection of productive individuals. We have seen single-person developments generate 25KSLOC of deliverable code in 4 months (a craft
 interface for a telecommunication system); two-person developments
 do 135 KSLOC in 30 months. Many of these adhered faithfully to all
 stipulated reviews and verification steps. 
Boehm [Boehm1981] notes a 20-fold spread between the least and
 most effective developers. A telecommunications developer recently
 told me that “having the right expertise means the difference between
 being able to solve a problem in a half hour, and never being able to
 solve the problem at all.” 
(Note: Boehm quotes Grant and Stackman [Grant1966] with a 26
fold spread, page 667.) 
The result of using a SOLO VIRTUOSO (4.2.5) is an organization limited
 to small development. Though there is a singleton development role,
 other roles may be necessary to support marketing, toolsmithing, and
 other functions. The productivity of a suitably chosen singleton developer is enough to handle sizable projects; here, we establish 25KSLOC
 as a limit. 
Therefore: 
Do the entire design and implementation with one or two of your
 most effective developers. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
This pattern is not a “License to Hack.” The work of SOLO VIRTUOSOS
 (4.2.5) is still subject to technical reviews, validation, and verification
 at appropriate times in the development cycle — STAND UP MEETING
 (5.2.7), ENGAGE CUSTOMERS (4.2.6). This combines nicely with DEVELOPING
 IN PAIRS (4.2.28). 
See also MODERATE TRUCK NUMBER (4.2.24), which raises concerns
 about the use of this pattern in risk-averse business.