SURROGATE CUSTOMER *
 Store dummy displaying Daniel Boone hat, fur trimming detachable, suitable 
for auto aerial plume (advertisement). Amsterdam, New York. 
...the project is beginning to move forward. As architects and developers get deeper into the project, requirements questions begin to surface. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
It is important to exchange ideas and clarify issues with customers. But a customer may not be available. 
There are several reasons that a customer may be unavailable. If the
 project is new, there may be no customers yet. In fact, the product
 might even create its own customers. Even in existing products, the
 organization may never have established relationships with customers, and now is not a propitious time to do so. 
In some cases, the customer might not have the time right now.
 They’re busy too. But you need answers immediately. 
Some corporate cultures are such that the developers are insulated
 from the customers; they just don’t talk. We certainly aren’t recommending it, but it does happen. 
 Whatever the cause, there is a temptation for developers to make
 their best guess and go on. The problem is that developers are naturally biased by their own designs, and will assume customer behavior
 that conforms to their design. There are always other ways to think
 about the application, some of which may not mesh with the developer’s view. 
Therefore: 
Create a SURROGATE CUSTOMER role in the project, and fill it with
 someone who will try to think like the customer. Use the SURROGATE
 CUSTOMER like the real customer. 
If the organization has human factors people, they are almost natural Surrogate Customers. Their emphasis may be on the human interface, but that is often much of the battle. System Test organizations are similar to SURROGATE CUSTOMERS, but
 there are important differences in intent. System testers tend to evaluate a product with respect to a specification, to determine its readiness for market. Customers, real or surrogate, are interested in
 whether the product meets their need and is easy to use. 
Fellow developers tend to make poor SURROGATE CUSTOMERS. Developers think too much alike (but see below). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Of course, no SURROGATE CUSTOMER will ever replace a real customer.
 But they allow the project to move ahead in the absence of more concrete information. For more reading on the limitations of the SURROGATE
 CUSTOMER role, see [ConstantineLockwood1999] and [Bramble2002]. 
Perhaps a perfect ideal comes where the developers are themselves
 customers or SURROGATE CUSTOMERS, if one can overcome the nerdish
 groupthink owing to their identity as developers. See CREATE RATHER THAN CONFORM (8.9) in the Quattro Pro for Windows case study. 
Most organizations seat the SURROGATE CUSTOMER with the development team; this role is often a member of the development team. Consider instead seating developers at the customer site to avoid the
 problem described in the book Contextual Design
 ([BeyerHoltzblatt1998], p. 34): 
Many IT departments avoid these problems by stationing IT 
developers with the customer organization. This certainly 
succeeds in making IT more responsive to the customer, but 
 brings a loss of control.. The developers easily become 
focused on short-term problems and soltions—they tend to 
become the local fix-it man. The structure of the customer’s 
work and long-term possibilities for improvement are no 
more visible to IT developers than to the customer, and with
out this perspective they, like the customer, focus on the 
immediate and most visible issues. And they are stationed in 
a particular department, so cross-departmental issues are as 
invisible to them as to their customers. They are rewarded for 
producing quick fixes to pressing problems. The usual result 
is doezens of small applications, each solving a single problem, that do not work together to support the work coherently.