 TEAM PRIDE **
 Problems worthy 
of attack 
prove their worth 
by hitting back. 
—Piet Hein (1905-1996) 
... you are about to embark on yet another challenging project. The
 work will be technically difficult, or maybe it’s just that you have a
 very short schedule. But at least you have some idea of what you want
 to do — the beginning of UNITY OF PURPOSE (4.2.12). 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
 People are most successful when they feel good about their
 project, and are confident. But there is a chicken and egg problem
 here: Confidence breeds success, but success creates confidence. 
Pride perhaps goeth before a fall, but so doth apathy. 
Most software projects—sometimes even the fun ones—demand a
 lot of work. And the ones that aren’t fun don’t have much of a chance
 of seeing a victorious finish unless something pulls its people together
 and draws them on towards completion. The hard work feels even
 harder because of short schedules. Such projects demand the best
 everyone can give, so motivation is often a key to success. 
If people consider the work to be “just a job”, the results will reflect
 it. 
Teams tend to become self-fulfilling prophecies: everyone wants to
 work on a winning team, so teams can pick the best people. On the
 other hand, teams with low performance tend to be stuck with low
 morale. People don’t join such teams willingly; they come in with a
 bad attitude. 
So how do you bring such a team out of the doldrums? Even better,
 how do you give a team a winning attitude right from the start? 
Therefore, 
“We’re the best.” Instill a sense of elitism into the team. Teams
 that have a certain arrogance tend to work hard and accomplish what
 is put before them. 
Really, one cannot open a team up and pour in a cup of team pride.
 Team pride must come from within. But there are many things you can
 do to help it come to pass: 
• Start with a worthwhile problem. Team members are more likely
 to feel elite if they have a challenging problem to tackle. It is
 especially good if the problem involves new technology; nothing
 excites a bunch of geeks more than working with the newest
 stuff. 
• Apply SELF SELECTING TEAM (4.2.11). If the team self-selects, they
 will go for the best people, in their opinion. So they will believe
 they are good. 
• Find some important strength of the team, and make that a rallying point: teach the team that they are good in a particular area.
 Be sure to find a real strength; people can easily see through a
 manufactured strength. The strength should be a technical
 strength; while a team might rally around “we party better than
 anyone else”, it won’t get the software written. 
• Provide some explicit separation from other projects. This can be
 physical location (put people together away from others), organizational, or information (share secrets with the group.) It can also
 be exemption from some of the rules that everyone else must follow. Just things to make it clear they are set apart from other
 groups. 
•COMPENSATE SUCCESS (4.2.25). 
• The parent company must be doing well enough so that it isn’t a
 concern. This author was once on a team that felt it was elite until
 the company started doing very poorly. The company woes
 diverted our attention and sapped our morale. 
• FIRE WALLS (4.2.9). This generates an attitude of “Top teams
 shouldn’t be bothered by bureaucratic crap.” 
• As with UNITY OF PURPOSE (4.2.12), it helps to unite against a common enemy. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
By itself, TEAM PRIDE does not guarantee the success of a project. But
 Boehm and others have pointed out that people are the key success
 element of any project, and TEAM PRIDE helps nurture and encourage
 them. It may even be able to overcome poor overall morale in the company.