WISE FOOL *
 I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are: they’ll have me 
whipped for speaking true, thou’lt have me whipped for lying; and 
sometimes I am whipped for holding my peace. 
— The fool, King Lear, act 1, scene 3. 
...a team has been established and is functioning. It is faced with a
 continual barrage of technical and non-technical challenges, about
 which it must make decisions. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Interpersonal dynamics often discourage good ideas from being
 aired, and bad ideas from being weeded out. 
There are two dynamics at work here, depending on the persons
 involved. Authority figures are often unchallenged: you might be
 reluctant to challenge your boss because of the perceived danger to
 your employment. People are also loathe to challenge the word of a
 respected elder in the organization for slightly different reasons. But
 this tends to keep allow bad ideas promoted by authority figures to
 promulgate without sufficient challenge and discussion. 
The other dynamic is the group itself. It is difficult to stand up in the
 face of the entire group to challenge an idea. These days, such troublemakers are rarely tarred and feathered, but they might be ostracized,
 or labeled “not a team player.” 
Yet somebody needs to be the catalyst to cause occasional group
 introspection. Someone needs to shout the warning when the group
 heads in the wrong direction. 
Therefore: 
Nurture the role of the wise fool, who can raise uncomfortable
 truths with impunity. 
The WISE FOOL asks the questions that may be unpopular or seem
 politically risky, but they make the project pause and reexamine decisions. Often, many people want to ask the same question, but do not
 dare. Wise fools have a mix of insight, candor, and foolhardiness. 
The Wise Fool is legendary. The most famous Wise Fool may well be
 found in the story of the Emperor’s New Clothes. It was a small boy
 who had the courage to point out the obvious. 
The WISE FOOL is much like a PUBLIC CHARACTER (4.2.17). But it differs
 in that the PUBLIC CHARACTER makes the group function smoothly, while
 the WISE FOOL focuses mainly on the outputs of the group—mainly
 technical. But like the PUBLIC CHARACTER, the WISE FOOL is not designated, but emerges. A WISE FOOL is usually highly respected technically, and may been be (or become) a LEGEND ROLE (4.2.20), but is
 known for lack of tact. They usually eschew managerial opportunities,
 and may even show disdain for management. An acquaintance of the
 author was once honored with the words, “In the face of management
 opposition, he charged ahead and did what was right.” 
Some organizations recognize WISE FOOLS. One organization we
 studied included a role called “Agitator”. 
A WISE FOOL needs to recognize the difference between asking legitimate questions and whining. Questioning things that one has no control over is often construed as whining. With too many such questions,
 the court of public opinion can demote a WISE FOOL to a Whiner rather
 quickly. 
 ✥ ✥ ✥ 
Organizations who have the good fortune to have a WISE FOOL in
 their midst are likely to make fewer wrong decisions than other organizations. However, the WISE FOOL may not receive the recognition
 they deserve; they may be perceived as troublemakers. This is slightly
 reminiscent of SACRIFICE ONE PERSON (4.1.22), in a strange sort of way.
 Managers should be sensitive to this, and make sure that WISE FOOLS
 are supported. 
Note that the key here is that the organization itself must be willing
 to accept criticism from within. There will always be people around
 willing to fill this role, but only the healthy organizations benefit from
 their insights. In fact, it often doesn’t come naturally even to healthy
 organizations. Some organizations within Siemens hold workshops to
 help create a culture where people can speak out [Ackermann2002].
 Unhealthy organizations may ignore, or even worse, actively suppress
 criticism. This creates a climate of fear of speaking out, which leads to
 widespread cynicism. In such cases, a few WISE FOOLS will refuse to be
 silenced, and become whistleblowers. When they report illegal conduct to authorities, they may even need laws to protect their actions.