ARCHITECTURE TEAM *
 Architects and engineers studying plans for Greenhills project, Ohio. 1936 
...you have a project direction defined, and now you need to come
 up with a structure for the system. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
You need to create an architecture that is simple and cohesive, but
 which accommodates a variety of constituencies. 
Most systems are too large for a single mind to analyze and resolve.
 Not only is the system to complex for a single person but the architecture must accommodate multiple viewpoints to be successful. You can
 solve this with a team of architects who bring diverse views, but the
 collision of diverse views brings difficulties of its own. 
A design by committee usually looks that way. It tends to result in
 everything being added, even the kitchen sink! (Try to get a picture of
 the Denver Public Library here.) 
Committees are inherently less efficient than individuals (see SOLO
 VIRTUOSO (4.2.5) for example.) Yet there is safety in a team; it makes it
 possible to keep a MODERATE TRUCK NUMBER (4.2.24). 
The entire organization will need to accept the architecture. The
 more people that are involved in the architecture, the better chance
 one has of “selling” the results. But the more constituencies involved,
 the more difficult it is to come to agreement in the first place. 
Therefore: 
 Create a small team of resonating minds to define the initial architecture, in such a way that the team covers the expected partitioning
 of the system. The key idea is that most or all the team members
 should come away with a piece of the system for which they have
 architectural responsibility. While this may appear to be trying to predict the future, one can usually easily identify the areas of grossest partitioning beforehand. For example, it is probably easy to guess a
 system might have a user interface, back-end storage, and internet
 communication areas. The careful selection of the team is aimed at preventing the “designed by committee” look. 
Other representatives may be needed to round out the team. Luke
 Hohmann notes the difference between the technical architecture and
 the marketing architecture; the marketing viewpoint may be very
 valuable in this team. 
The ARCHITECTURE TEAM’s task is to create a high level partitioning.
 There remains much architectural work to be completed at lower
 levels. Charles Weir designates the high level architecture team as the
 “Master”, while “Journeyman architects” take on the design of the
 smaller pieces. The Master-Journeyman (10.5.17) pattern also suggests
 typical partitioning of core architecture, architectural vision, interfaces,
 and specification control [Weir1998]. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
Legitimizing this activity as a team, with organizational structure,
 lends support to the social interaction necessary to forming and sustaining the shared vision (see UNITY OF PURPOSE (4.2.12)). 
The team should have a periodic STAND UP MEETING (5.2.7) to maintain the architectural integrity of the system. Early in the project, these
 meetings can take place daily. 
Note that an architecture team focuses on the initial architecture. The
 result should be a gross partitioning of the system, allowing members
 of the architecture team to be architects of their own subsystems (see
 also CONWAY’S LAW (5.1.7).) 
The best way to accomplish a shared architectural vision is probably through the use of LOCK ’EM UP TOGETHER (5.2.5). 
HOLISTIC DIVERSITY (4.2.19) is a pattern that ties together the multiple
 teams such as infrastructure teams and other teams relating to individual domains and technologies. The ARCHITECTURE TEAM may either
 be such a team or contribute to a cross-disciplinary team that goes
 beyond architectural issues into issues of business and implementation. 
This pattern is a refinement of Harrison’s “Diversity of Membership” [Harrison1996]. 
This pattern draws heavily on Gerard Meszaros’ ARCHITECTURE DEFINITION TEAM (10.5.4). Gerard further suggests that there be a separate
 ARCHITECTURE ORGANIZATION that owns the architecture. Here, we propose that ownership and function be tied together. This pattern also
 arises in Alistair Cockburn’s analysis of the interaction between
 HOLISTIC DIVERSITY (4.2.19) and SUBSYSTEM BY SKILL (4.2.23). See also
 ARCHITECT CONTROLS PRODUCT (5.2.3) and ARCHITECT ALSO IMPLEMENTS
 (5.2.10).