PARSER BUILDER *
 Fort Riley, Kansas. Decoding a message at the message center which was 
established by the Signal Corps during a field problem. (Parsing is a form of 
decoding.) 
...many systems need to read data from a stream and classify elements on the steam as objects. Many times the knowledge of how to
 interpret a stream is know by a different group than the knowledge of
 how to use that stream, making LOOSE INTERFACES (5.2.17) advantageous. 
Given a data stream, we want to interpret it, classifying the elements into the appropriate class of object. The data stream contains
 tags that can be used to identify the raw data, and we want to convert
 the stream into object form, so we can process the data. 
We need a way to create arbitrary objects based on tokens in the
 data stream. 
✥ ✥ ✥ 
For example consider the problem of reading in raw UNIX files and
 classifying them into types of files based on their “magic number” —
 as in the tags in the /etc/magic file. You could create the appropriate
 subclass of File and then invoke its virtual edit() method, bringing up
 the appropriate editor. 
In a telemetry processing system each telemetry packet has identifying information in its header. The telemetry processing system
 design requires that an object, once created, knows how to process
 itself (i.e., we will not use a dispatch table, or a switch on type—this is
 to satisfy the ORGANIZATION FOLLOWS LOCATION (5.1.8) pattern). At the
 lowest level objects will be created using a FACTORY METHOD
 [GOF1995]. Each class of packets will be processed differently; some
 will assemble themselves into larger units, others will issue messages.
 Consider the following hierarchy, for a spacecraft that there are two
 subclasses of Packet:APackets and BPackets: 
Sample Packet Hierarchy 
We want each Packet, once created, to process itself by using a virtual method, process(). If we pass a data stream into a factory, we want
 to return a pointer to a Packet that has the appropriate type. To summarize the forces: 
• There is a need to interpret a raw data stream. 
• There is a generic way to process the packets once they are
 returned from the factory. 
• The raw data contain tags which can be used for classification. 
Therefore: 
Use a PARSER BUILDER which reads the identifying information
 from the header of the packet, and creates an object of the appropriate type, removing only one object’s worth of data from the
 stream. 
An example of a client interface in C++ is: 
 while (!dataStream.empty()) { 
PacketFactory f; 
Packet* p = f.make(dataStream); 
if(p) p->process() 
} 
This is a variant of ABSTRACT FACTORY [GOF1995] but the object to be
 created is defined in the data stream, rather than by the client. HIERARCHY OF FACTORIES (5.2.19) and PARSER BUILDER can be used to implement LOOSE INTERFACES (5.2.17) by providing a means of separating
 clients from producers of data (assuming that data producers also
 define the factories). 
Other uses: 
In some object persistence mechanisms, objects are assigned class
 Id’s which are placed in the storage stream. These Ids are restored first
 to allow the system decide what class object to make from the restored
 stream. 
PARSER BUILDER is used in in the pattern QUERY OBJECTS
 [BrownWhitenack1999] to convert SQL statements to QUERY objects.
 (Query Objects addresses the problem of handling the generation and
 execution of SQL statements in an object-oriented way, when you are
 trying to use a relational database to store objects.) [Riehl1999] discusses similar issues, building objects on a desktop using specifications. 
The distinction between this pattern, Builder [GOF1995] and FACTORY METHOD [GOF1995] is that in this pattern the factory reads from a
 stream and the client does not know which type of object will be
 returned. For text interpretation, PARSER BUILDER can be a front end to
 the Interpreter [GOF1995] pattern. 